Interim forecast, September 2008   
 
 Sharper-than-expected slowdown in Europe The economic situation remains unusually uncertain.
 One year after the outbreak of the financial 
turmoil, the situation in the international financ
ial system continues to be fragile with several key 
credit markets still severely disr
upted. Moreover, commodity pr
ices, especially energy and food 
prices, have soared since the last quarter of 
2007, fuelling inflation and severely constraining the 
leeway for monetary policies, even if they have 
fallen back somewhat in recent weeks. Business and 
consumer confidence has declined significantly, to l
evels well below the long-term averages in many 
sectors and regions. Output has started to fall in 
several advanced economies, reinforced by a bust in 
the housing sector that is spreadi
ng more widely than expected earli
er. Although growth has remained 
robust so far in emerging economies, a global economic slowdown is looming.  
In the EU, GDP contracted by 0.1% in the second quarter of 2008 (and by 0.2% in the euro area). The 
drop in output is partly explained by a payback from
 unexpectedly strong growth in the first quarter, 
which was to a certain extent caused by temporary 
factors. However, in addition, soaring commodity 
prices, the deepening financial turmoil and a housing 
shock in several countri
es caused confidence to 
deteriorate, capital costs to increase further and 
consumer-price inflation to surge, thus putting a 
brake on domestic demand. 
Looking ahead, recent soft and hard data point to 
a persistent weakness of economic activity in the 
EU. Although external economic conditions have im
proved somewhat in recent weeks and the labour 
market situation remains relatively favourable,
 adverse confidence effects, along with sharp 
corrections in housing and construc
tion markets in some Member States,
 may increasingly take a toll.  Based on an update of the outlook for the seven larg
est EU economies, GDP growth for 2008 has been 
revised down to 1.4% in the EU and to 1.3 % in the euro area. The downward revision is relatively 

broad-based with significant revisions for the Un
ited Kingdom and Spain, while growth remains 
strong in Poland.  
Consumer price inflation has continued to drift up in
 recent months, fuelled by high commodity prices. 
Inflation in 2008 is projected to average 3.8% in th
e EU and 3.6% in the euro area. However, with the 
impact of past increases in energy and food prices 
on the year-on-year rate of change in consumer 
prices declining in the coming months, inflation coul
d be at a turning point. Future developments in 
commodity markets, as well as the capacity to 
contain second-round effects, will be key for the 
inflation outlook in the EU and the euro area. 
 A sharper global slowdown  
The global economic situation and outlook remain 
unusually uncertain. On the 
back of the protracted 
turmoil in the financial sector, soaring commodity 
prices and, for some countries, a bust in their 

housing sector, output in most advanced economies 
have started to fall in the second quarter.  
In some cases, advanced economies appear to be 
close to a technical recession, while inflation is at a 

record high. Although emerging economies have, 
so far, weathered the global headwinds better, 
inflation and the fall in demand in OECD countries 
are starting to take a toll.  
The financial turmoil entering a second year
 The financial turmoil has now entered its second 
year. Overall, the situation remains fragile as losses 
continue to mount and confidence in key financial 

markets is not yet restored. Unsecured lending in 
interbank markets remains disrupted. Central banks 
have continued to respond to the turmoil by 

ensuring adequate liquidity in the banking system.   
 Interim forecast, September 2008      2 Graph 1: Corporate yield 
spreads in the euro area 
-50.0
0.0
50.0
100.0
150.0
200.0
250.0

300.0
02030405060708
bps.
BBB
AAAAAA
 After a brief recovery following the quick rescue of 
Bear Stearns earlier this y
ear, sentiment in financial 
markets has deteriorated over the summer months. 
The outlook for a sharper-than-earlier-expected 
global economic slowdown in the second half of 
this year and beyond has 
raised concern that the 
financial turmoil may deepen further. In particular, 
a deceleration in real 
economic activity could 
amplify problems in the financial sector by 

decreasing the capacity of companies and 
households to service their debt-repayment 
obligations. This could lead to an increasing rate of 

loan delinquencies causing further bank losses, 
even for secured loans as asset valuation becomes 
more vulnerable to declines in growth and business 

sentiment. This, in turn, might cause banks to 
tighten their lending standards further, making it 
more difficult for companies to secure the 

necessary external finance. 
While the risk of such a 
vicious circle, often referred to as a "negative 
feedback loop", has increased, it remains a tail 

event. Concerns about financial market developments 
have also caused a renewed "flight to quality" 
among investors, with widening spreads over the 
summer between risk-free benchmark bond yields 
and yields on relatively risky investments. More 

recently, however, 3-mont
h euro-area interbank 
spreads appear to have stabilised, albeit at a 
relatively high level. 
Banks have been at the centre of the financial 
turmoil since the outset and the sector continues to 
experience serious problems. Globally, banks have 
recorded losses and write-downs of slightly above 
USD 500 billion (bn), of which about 170 bn has 
been reported by banks within the EU (and slightly 

more than 100 bn in the euro area) according to 
market analysts; and further losses are expected in 
the months ahead. To strengthen their balance 

sheets, banks have raised about USD 350 billion of 
new capital since the beginning of the turmoil. 
However, raising capital has become increasingly 

difficult in view of lower bank earnings due to 
higher financing costs and mounting credit write-
downs.   
The decline in bank earnings has resulted in tighter 
lending standards and higher borrowing costs since 
the outset of the turmoil. According to the July 

2008 bank-lending survey for the euro area, banks 
have tightened lending standards for the fourth 
consecutive quarter and plan 
to continue doing so in 
the third quarter of 2008. It should be noted that the 
net tightening remained stronger for large 
enterprises than for small and medium-sized 

enterprises (SMEs), presumably because bigger 
enterprises are more likely to be clients of large 
banks, which, in turn, have been so far more 

heavily affected by the financial turmoil. Banks 
tightened lending standards for consumer credit for 
the third consecutive quarter.  
There is, however, no credit 
crunch in the EU or the 
euro area as a whole at 
present. The impact of 
tighter lending standards on actual bank lending has 
been very gradual. Bank lending to euro-area 
private sector is slowing (from 10.7% YoY in April 
to 9.4% in July). A slowdown of lending to 

households, which started before the outbreak of 
the turmoil, has been the main source of this 
deceleration. Falling house prices and reduced 

investor demand for asset-backed securities and 
covered bonds have led banks to reduce their 
exposures to the mortgage market. Notwithstanding 

tighter lending standards, bank lending to non-
financial corporations remains strong, growing at 
13.2% in the same period. The slowdown in credit 

aggregates appears to be due mainly to lower 
demand for loans, driven by traditional 
determinants (activity and interest rates), rather 

than to credit supply constraints. 
 
 Interim forecast, September 2008      3Graph 2: Net tightening of bank lending standards 
-30
-20

-10
010
20
30
405060
70030405060708
%Housing 
Corporate 
   Average oil prices remain high, in spite of recent 
decline
 Oil prices are currently at least four times the levels 
of five years ago in US-dollars (USD) terms, and 
have at least tripled in euro terms. Sustained strong 
demand growth, particularly in emerging 

economies, together with the fact that demand is 
proving rather unresponsive to high oil prices are 
the main factors explaini
ng high oil prices. In 
addition, oil producers have difficulties with 
maintaining an adequate level of supply. Taken 
together, these factors result in a tight oil market. 

Moreover, geopolitical and weather-related risks 
also increase uncertainty about supply.   
 A weaker outlook for global growth and a 
somewhat improved supply have allowed oil prices 

to decline in recent weeks.
 Prices have come down 
from a peak of 146 USD/bl. on 4 July to below 110 
USD/bl. at the beginning of September, but spot 
and futures markets remain volatile.  
Based on futures market prices, oil prices are 
assumed to average just above 114 USD/bl. in 

2008, i.e. up by 13% compared with the spring 
forecast, see Graph 3.  
 
  Graph 3: Oil price assumptions in the Commission's 
forecasts 020406080100

120
140
160
040506070809
Autumn 2007
Spring 2008
September 2008
Realisations
Futures
USD/bl.
 Looking forward, in the short term, falling demand 
due to the worsening economic outlook and 
expected new production capacity should mitigate 

upward price pressure. Ne
vertheless, uncertainties 
will remain high, as demand in emerging markets 
remains relatively strong and there may be delays in 

bringing additional supply on-stream.  
 
Is a global slowdown looming on the horizon? 

GDP growth proved surprisingly strong in the first 
half of 2008 in most parts of the world. These 
positive outcomes, together with upward revisions 
to 2007 data, point to a slight upward revision of 
world growth (excl. the EU) for 2008 as a whole 

relative to the spring forecast.  
Looking ahead, however, growth in the second half 
of 2008 is set to deceler
ate more markedly than 
expected in the spring, reflecting a delayed impact 

of the shocks. Although a full assessment of the 
outlook for 2009 will only be carried out in the next 
fully-fledged forecast in
 November 2008, these 
developments in the global economy seem to 
suggest a significant downward revision for 2009.  
US economic activity, in particular, held up 
surprisingly well in the first half of 2008, following 

a small decline in the final quarter of 2007. GDP 
growth increased to 0.2% QoQ in Q1 and to 0.8% 
in Q2. An aggressive monetary easing over the past 

year, a large fiscal stimulus package in February 
Interim forecast, September 2008      4 and the dollar depreciation, which has brought 
about a strong improvement in net exports, have 
supported economic activity. Tax rebates were 

disbursed faster than expected and households seem 
to have spent a significant share of them already in 
the second quarter. 
However, the fiscal stimulus is only temporary and 
its effect on GDP growth is expected to fade in the 
second half of the year. A
lthough the annual growth 
rate for 2008 has risen, due to the strong 

performance in the first 
half of the year, the 
underlying growth momentum remains weak. 
Continued decline in house prices and a weakening 
of the labour market could depress consumer 
spending for an extended period. Although net 

exports should continue to provide some offset, 
GDP growth is expected to turn negative in the 
second half of 2008. Headline inflation, however, 

which has been driven up by surging energy prices 
recently, should fall substantially in the near term. 
In other 
advanced economies
, the global slowdown 
and the impact of high energy prices are 

increasingly being felt. In Japan, after an 
unexpectedly strong first qu
arter, GDP contracted 
by 0.6 percent in the second quarter, its worst 

quarterly performance in seven years, while 
industrial production has contracted for two 
consecutive quarters.  

 A relatively high dependence on imported energy 
and raw materials and a heavy reliance on 
manufacturing make Japan more vulnerable to high 
commodity prices and 
a global manufacturing 
slump. Nevertheless, a relatively healthy financial 
position of the corporate sector (incl. banks), low 
inventory levels in most manufacturing sectors and 

the recent downward
 correction in oil prices should 
help contain downside risks.  
 
The Canadian economy, despite its sound 
macroeconomic fundamentals, is experiencing a 
growth slowdown due to falling US demand and a 

considerable appreciation of
 the Canadian dollar in 
recent years. Domestic demand, however, remains 
sturdy and core inflation low, which provide a good 

basis for a swift recovery.  
  
 Graph 4: Imports of goods by region 
-10
-50510152025000102030405060708
emerging markets
world
industrialised countries
yoy % Source: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis 
 Emerging economies
 contributed significantly to 
global growth (accounting for more than two-thirds 
in 2007 and in the first half of 2008), despite the 

weak performance of adva
nced economies. This 
may, however, change as the persistent slowdown 
in advanced economies has started to affect them.  
In China, despite weaker exports due to sluggish 
global demand and a moderate appreciation of the 
renminbi, strong investment and consumption kept 
GDP growth high in the first half of 2008 (at 10.4% 

year-on-year). In most other emerging Asian 
countries, however, recent data point towards a 
marked deceleration of economic activity, led by a 

slowdown in export gr
owth. In some cases, a 
tightening of monetary policy in response to higher 
energy and food prices and worsening consumer 

and business confidence are also weighing on 
domestic demand.  
Several Latin American countries have continued to 
show relatively fast growth despite weakening 
global demand. Russia™s economic performance has 
also remained strong, although industrial 

production is slowing and a reassessment of 
political risks has caused a partial reversal of capital 
inflows.  
   
 Interim forecast, September 2008      5Graph 5: Real residential property prices 
-6-30369121518212499000102030405060708
euro area
DEUKESFRyoy%
  Housing is increasingly weighing on the outlook 
The adverse effects of the global financial turmoil 
are reinforcing ongoing adjustments in housing 
markets. Housing markets in many countries, 

including several EU Member States, have been 
buoyant over the past deca
de, driven by low real 
interest rates and Œ in some countries Œ rapid 
demographic changes. Real residential property 
prices, however, started to
 decelerate in the middle 
of this decade in the eu
ro area, and it is now 
reaching negative territory (Graph 5). Among the 
largest EU countries, Sp
ain, France and the United 
Kingdom have experienced particularly sharp 
turnaround in their house markets.  
A downturn in housing markets is likely to affect 
overall economic activity adversely. Private 

consumption demand may be muted by adverse 
wealth effects stemming fro
m the decline in house 
prices. Wealth effects are usually thought to be less 

strong in the euro area than
 in the US, but can be 
important in countries with high home-ownership 
rates or a more widespread use of housing collateral 

for household credit, or when the size of house-
price correction is substantial. At the same time, 
construction activity is suffering from the lower 

profitability of housing investment as well as the 
more limited availability of credit. Sharp 
construction downturns are 
already being observed 
in Spain, France and Ireland.  
Looking ahead, the ongoing softening of housing 
markets is likely to persist. As a result, both 
housing investment and private consumption are 

likely to expand at subdue
d paces in countries that 
are affected.  Solid growth performance of the European 
economy has come to an end  
The EU economies entered 2008 on a sound note. 
Economic activity expanded above trend, at 0.7% 
(quarter-on-quarter (QoQ)) in the euro area and 
0.6% in the EU. In view of the shocks facing the 
EU economy since mid-2007, this performance was 
above market expectations and the Commission's 

spring forecasts of 0.5% for the euro area. 
The main driver of GDP growth in the first quarter 
was investment, particularly construction 
investment, which was boosted by the favourable 

winter weather in some
 countries. Equipment 
investment remained healthy, still benefiting from 
high levels of capacity utilisation and corporate 

profits. The performance of private consumption 
was more subdued, in line with the poor 
performance of retail sales and the deterioration of 

consumer confidence, unde
rmined by tighter credit 
conditions and the acceleratio
n of inflation, which 
squeezed households' disposable income.  
Partly due to the unwinding of the temporary 
effects observed in the first quarter and partly due 
to the weakening of the underlying growth 
momentum, a correction was to be expected for the 
second quarter. Euro-area 
GDP declined, by 0.2% 
(QoQ), for the first time since the inception of the 

common currency area. Economic activity 
marginally declined also in the EU (-0.1%) but far 
below the Commission's spring forecasts (of +0.2% 

for the euro area and +0.3% for the EU).  
Overall, the performance of GDP was somewhat 
less negative than expected by most market 
analysts, at the time of the release. 
    
  Interim forecast, September 2008      6 Graph 6: Contributions to GDP growth in the euro 
area -0.6
-0.4

-0.2
0.0
0.2

0.4

0.6
0.8
1.0

1.2
07Q107Q207Q307Q408Q108Q2
inventories
domestic demand
net exports
GDP growth (qoq %)
pps. 
  The decline in GDP in th
e euro area was entirely 
attributable to domestic
 demand factors in the 
second quarter of 2008. The poor performance of 
household consumption was mainly due to weak 
real incomes induced by 
the sharp increase in oil 
prices, some moderation in labour market 
conditions and by tighter lending standards for 
households. Gross fixed capital formation 

contracted because of the construction setback after 
the strong first quarter, but 
also as a result of a more 
subdued demand weighing on business confidence, 

particularly in the UK. Exports slowed 
substantially, likely reflecting the weakening of 
global demand and the past appreciation of the 

euro, which has diminished the competitiveness of 
euro-area producers.  
 Imports, however, also decelerated markedly 
mirroring the slowdown of domestic demand. As a 

result, the contribution of net exports to GDP 
growth was negligible in the second quarter.  
 
 Survey indicators points to a further weakening in 
the coming months
 Looking ahead, a broad-based decline in survey 
indicators throughout the summer suggest a further 
weakening of the underlying growth momentum in 
the EU economy in the second half of 2008. 

  Graph 7: The Commission's economic sentiment 
indicator (s.a.) 
85909510010511011512099000102030405060708
EUEuro Area
balance
100 = long-term average
   The European Commission's economic sentiment 
indicator continued to fall during the summer. It is 
now significantly below its long-term average for 
both the EU and the euro area. In August, economic 

sentiment in the EU reached its lowest level since 
December 1993.  
 
The fall in confidence has spread to all sectors of 
the economy. In services, 
confidence was already 
below its long-term average at the time of the 

spring forecast, while co
nfidence in manufacturing 
held up somewhat better. Since then, however, 
sentiment in manufacturing has deteriorated 

significantly. In August, industrial confidence 
reached its lowest level since May 2005.  
 
High oil prices, a strong 
euro Œ in spite of recent 
declines Œ and the slowin
g global economy are the 
main factors that are weighing on business 

conditions. Capacity utilisation slipped again in the 
second quarter, but it is still well above its historical 
average. 
 The Purchasing Managers' Indices (PMI) broadly 

confirm this message. The overall PMI index 
continued on a declining trend during the summer, 
though there was a marginal improvement in 

August compared to July.  
  
 Interim forecast, September 2008      7Graph 8: Change in Commission's key confidence 
indicators  
(July 2007 - August 2008
1) -34
-30
-26
-22
-18
-14
-10
-6-22UKESFRITDENLPL
Manufacturing
Services
Consumer
ESI
pps.
  The fall in confidence indicators is by now broad- 
based across Member States by now. Since the 
outbreak of the financial turmoil last summer, the 

decline in the overall econo
mic sentiment indicator 
has been particularly large in Spain and the UK. 
More recently, confidence ha
s deteriorated sharply 
also in the other larger EU economies Œ except for 
Poland, where the deterioration has been moderate.  
Like business confidence, consumer confidence has 
also fallen rapidly since July 2007 in most Member 

States.  Sizeable downward revisions for the EU and euro-
area growth 
Based on the individual updates for Germany, 
Spain, France, Italy, th
e Netherlands, Poland, and 
the United Kingdom (which are presented in greater 
detail in the country-specific sections below), GDP 

growth is expected to stall in the third quarter in 
both the euro area and the EU.  
                                                    1 July 2008 for France.
 Graph 9: Comparison of sp
ring and interim forecast 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Euro areaEU 27
YoY, % ch.
2008 Spring forecast
2008 Interim forecast
Q4/Q4 Spring forecast
Q4/Q4 Interim forecast
  In the fourth quarter, reflecting a somewhat more 
benign outlook in the larger EU economies but 

Spain and the UK, economic activity is expected to 
expand slightly (by 0.1%) in both the euro area and 
the EU. Compared to the Commission's spring 

forecast (+0.4% for both qua
rters and regions), this 
represents a sizeable downward revision of the 
growth prospects.  
The downward revision for annual growth in 2008 
is due to data revisions for 2007, a weaker-than-
expected second quarter, and the significantly 
weaker outlook for the second half. These factors 

taken together bring the annual growth rate for 
2008 down to 1.3% in the 
euro area and 1.4% in the 
EU. This is a downward revision of the annual GDP 
growth by 0.4 pp. in the euro area and 0.6 pp. in the 
EU compared to the spring projections.  
The revisions might look at first sight relatively 
limited in light of the significant worsening of the 
external conditions and their interactions with 
internal dynamics. In fact, given the stronger-than- 

expected first quarter, the annual averages mask the 
slower growth momentum from the second quarter 
onwards. The magnitude of the downward revisions 

becomes clearer when comp
aring the year-on-year growth rates for the fourth quarter that have been 
revised down by 0.9 pp. in the euro area and a full 

percentage point in the EU (see Graph 9). 
  Interim forecast, September 2008      8 Graph 10: Consumer confidence and private 
consumption
  0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
99000102030405060708
-21
-18
-15
-12
-9-6-303private consumption (lhs)
consumer confidence and long-term average (rhs)
balance
yoy% Domestic demand is foreseen to remain weak over 
the forecast horizon. 
Renewed consumption 
strength after a very meagre first half of the year 
would be needed to support economic activity at 
this juncture. In this regard, a continuation of the 

benign oil price dynamic observed in recent weeks 
and the projected easing of inflation in the fourth 
quarter would certainly help.  
However, consumer and retail confidence has 
continued to deteriorate in the third quarter and the 
willingness to make major purchases was at a 
record low in August. In addition, the labour 

market, an important driving force of household 
spending in the EU is not sending a reassuring 
message.  
Firms' employment expectations continued to 
soften in the first half of the year and the signs of 
weakness multiplied in the third quarter, 
particularly in the manufacturing sector. The 

number of unemployed is on the rise since March 
of this year in the euro 
area. As the labour market 
usually lags the economic cycle, even more 
subdued developments may be expected for the 
near future. Lastly, consumption of durable goods 

will be adversely affected by the downturn in the 
housing cycle and tighter financial conditions.  
 
  
 Graph 11: Equipment investment and production 
expectations -8-6
-4-2024
6
81099000102030405060708
-10
-505101520equipment investment (lhs)
production expectations in manufacturing (rhs)
balance
yoy%
 Investment in construction, particularly in those EU 
countries where house prices
 had risen significantly 
over the past decade, will suffer from the ongoing 
house-price correction. In
 these Member States, 
growth of bank lending for housing is decelerating 
and building permits have weakened considerably.  
Investment in equipment is expected to settle at 

lower levels than the recen
t buoyant trend. Most of 
the corporate sector is still enjoying good 
fundamentals and above l
ong-term average levels 
of capacity utilisation. However, business 
confidence is declining markedly in both 
manufacturing and services. Faltering retail sales 

are adding to worries for the business sector. 
Production expectations in
 the manufacturing sector 
are currently at their lowest level since the third 

quarter of 2001. Stock depletion in the current 
subdued environment is likely to require a scaling 
back of production. In addition, the cost of capital 
has increased, bank lending 
to corporates is slowing 
and corporates' profitability, although still high, 

may be squeezed by the direct and indirect effects 
of the commodity price increases and the observed 
acceleration of unit labour 
costs. Overall, this 
points to a weakening of the outlook for investment 
in equipment. 
Some of the external conditions have improved 
slightly in recent weeks. While remaining very 

high, oil prices have receded substantially from 
their mid-July peak. Th
e nominal and effective 
exchange rates of the euro have depreciated over 

the summer, though they re
main above their long-
Interim forecast, September 2008      9term average. However, the typical lags in the 
reaction of trade flows to exchange-rate movements 
may imply that the strong euro will continue to be a 

drag on euro-area exports for a while. In addition, 
as the most important factor for euro-area exports 
will remain the developments in external demand, 

the decelerating trend in 
world trade does not bode 
well for the export outlook. Import growth should 
also decelerate, reflecting the expected slowdown 

in domestic demand.  
 Inflation at a turning point? 
 Consumer price inflation rose rapidly in the first 
half of 2008 in the euro area, to 3.5%, thus 0.2 pp. 
higher than in the spring forecast and up from 2.1% 

in 2007. In the EU it was 3.7%, 0.3 pp. higher than 
in the spring forecast and 
compared to 2.3% last 
year.  
 The headline inflation rate started to accelerate last 
autumn driven by soaring oil and food prices and 

reinforced by unfavourable base effects. It 
decelerated slightly in Augus
t, to 3.8%, in the euro 
area. Although it implied a certain decline from the 

record-high level reported in July (4.0%), it was 
running above the 2% threshold for the eleventh 
consecutive month.  

 The surge in oil pri
ces has increased the 
contribution of the energy component to headline 
inflation from 0.1 pp. in July 2007 to 1.7 pps. one 
year later. Similarly, 
the recent unprecedented 
acceleration of world food commodity prices has 
inflated the contribution of the food component 
from 0.4 pp. to 1.2 pps. The contribution was larger 

for the processed than the unprocessed food 
component, unlike periods of agricultural price 
increases in the past. 

 Among the measures of underlying inflation, HICP 
inflation excluding energy and unprocessed food 

(core inflation) grew from 2.1% in the second half 
of 2007 to 2.5% in the first half of 2008. Similarly, 
HICP inflation excludin
g energy only increased 
from 2.2% to 2.6%. In contrast, HICP inflation 
excluding energy and all food decreased slightly 
from 1.9% to 1.8%.  

 Graph 12: Headline and core
 inflation, euro area  
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

2.0
2.5
3.0

3.5
4.0
4.5
2006m012007m012008m01
yoy%
HICP
HICP excl. energy and unprocessed food
HICP excl. energy
HICP excl. energy and all food
  The increase in core inflation can be attributed 
mainly to processed food, 
where inflation increased 
from 1.9% in July 2007 to 7.2% one year later. 
Services inflation was stable, at 2.5% on average 
for the past 12 months, while inflation in non-

energy industrial goods d
ecreased from 1% in the 
second half of 2007 to ¾% in the first half of 2008.  
 
Between July 2007 and July 2008, producer-price 
inflation surged from 1.9% to 9.0%, on the back of 
accelerating prices of en
ergy and food input 
products, as well as rising wages. However, high 
profit margins and increased competition in some 
countries and sectors, t
ogether with a projected 
lower demand could put a lid on further price 
increases.  

 Turning to wage indicators, the growth of nominal 
compensation per employee remained subdued (at 

2.2% YoY) until Q3 of 2007, but increased 
thereafter to 2.8% in Q4 and 2.9% in the first 
quarter of 2008. Total hourly labour costs grew at 

an annual rate of 3.3% in the first quarter of 2008 
(up from 2.9% in Q4 last year). The annual growth 
rate of unit labour cost, which stood unchanged in 

the first quarter of 2008 at 2.4%, remains at its 
highest rate in five years. The rise in wage 
pressures can be largely attributed to tighter labour 

markets and continued high capacity utilisation, as 
well as the nominal wage indexation schemes 
existing in several countries.  

  Interim forecast, September 2008      10 Graph 13: Inflation expectations, euro area  
1.9
2.0
2.1

2.2
2.3
2.4

2.5
2.6
Jan-05Jan-06Jan-07Jan-08
yoy%
0510
152025
3035balance
OATi break-even inflation (lhs)
consumer inflation expectations (rhs)
According to various measures, consumers' and 
producers' inflationary expectations moderated 
somewhat in August, appa
rently affected by the 
movements in oil prices, whilst remaining at 
relatively elevated levels.  Looking ahead, the outlook for inflation in 2008 
has been revised upwards,
 with sizeable upward 
revisions for all of the la
rgest Member States. HICP 
inflation is now expected 
to average 3.6% in the 
euro area and 3.8% in the EU this year. This adds 

about half a percentage point to consumer price 
inflation in the euro area and about 0.2 pp. for the 
EU compared to the spring 2008 forecast.  
The upward revision is mainly due to higher-than-
expected inflation in the second quarter and more 
pronounced lagged effects of oil and food price 
increases registered since last autumn. Inflation is 

now expected to peak in th
e third quarter of 2008 at 
4.2% in the EU and at 3.
9% in the euro area, and 
decrease gradually thereafter. 
The projected moderation in inflation results from 
the assumed reduced inflationary impulses from 
commodity prices, base ef
fects turning favourable 
as last year's surge of o
il and food prices gradually 
cease to impact the inflation rate, as well as 
expected lower demand and a cyclical downswing 

in the labour market.  
So far, there has been on
ly a limited evidence of 
second-round effects. However, the risk of such 
effects cannot be excluded, especially if the 

inflationary expectations were to become less well-
anchored. Moreover, the o
il market remains tight, 
despite the current easi
ng of prices, and any 
renewed oil price hikes will worsen the inflation 

prospects in the EU.  
 Some signs of weakness also in the labour market 
and as regards public finances 
The improvement in employment has weakened. 
The number of employed in
creased by 0.3% in Q4 
in 2007 and Q1 this year 
in both the euro area and 
in the EU, implying a certain slowdown compared 
to previous quarters. The year-on-year growth in 
employment declined to 1.6% in Q1 in both the 
euro area and in the EU.  

 The rate of unemployment has remained broadly 
unchanged in the past few months in both regions, 

following the continuous declines during the 
previous three years. In July, the unemployment 
rate stood at 7.3% in the 
euro area and at 6.8% in 
the EU. However, increased divergences across EU 
countries have emerged, with a rapid deterioration 
in labour-market developments in Spain 

counteracted by continued slight improvements in 
many other Member States, including Germany, 
France and Poland. 
Employment developments can usually be expected 
to follow GDP growth with a lag. In its spring 
forecast, the Commission 
projected employment 
growth at 0.8Œ0.9% in 2008. In light of the current 

downward revisions of the growth projection, the 
outlook for employment should also turn more 
unfavourable. For the near term, this view is 
supported by the marked recent deterioration in the 
survey data concerning employment expectations of 

businesses and households.  
Turning to public finances, the information 
available suggests that the 2008 budgetary position 
in the EU and the euro area could also be worse 

than expected in the spri
ng forecast. This is to a 
significant degree due to lower output growth and 
its impact on tax revenues. In a few countries, 

expansionary fiscal measures also play a role. 
Obviously, in countries with a rapid economic 
downturn and where the slowdown is combined 

with composition effects Œ e.g. due to the end of 
tax-rich domestically-driven demand growth or the 
reversal of an asset boom Œ the deterioration in 
Interim forecast, September 2008      11public finances is more pronounced, while in 
countries where economic activity has upheld 
reasonably well, budget
ary developments are 
broadly in line with expectations.  
A full assessment of the prospects for employment 
and public finances will be carried out in the 
Commission's upcoming autumn forecast.  
 Not only external forces behind the sharper-than-
expected downturn in growth and up-tick in 
inflation  
When now updating the outlook for GDP and 
inflation this year, it is clear that the risks to growth 
and inflation highlighted in
 our spring forecast in 
April 2008 have mostly materialised. In particular, 

commodity prices continued to soar, well beyond 
the assumptions on which the spring forecast was 
based.
2 Oil prices averaged 122 USD per barrel in 
the second quarter of 2008, compared with the 104 
USD assumed in the forecast (Graph 3). Other 
commodity prices, such as agricultural commodity 

prices, remained elevated 
in the second quarter of 
2008. Some weather-related factors may have 
played a role in the case of food prices.  
Higher commodity prices fuelled inflation, thereby 
putting a brake on real disposable income and 
private consumption growth.  
Moreover, the turmoil in the financial markets has 
proven more persistent than assumed in the spring. 

Sentiment in financial markets has significantly 
deteriorated over the summer months, following a 
brief recovery earlier this year. The need for a 
government rescue package for the US mortgage 
market-makers Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac was a 

clear warning that the turmoil was far from being 
over. Furthermore, a sharper-than-earlier-expected 
global economic slowdown has also raised concerns 

that the financial distress may deepen and widen 
further. 
                                                 2 The external assumptions in the Commission's forecasts are 
derived from market expectations at the time of the forecast, 
using a 10-day average to filter out market volatility. See box on 

technical background to the interim forecast on page 20 for a 
detailed description of the 
current set of assumptions.
 The deterioration in external conditions (including 
commodity prices) interacted with lower domestic 
growth dynamics to result in the weak performance 

noted in the second quarter in both the EU and the 
euro area. Other indicators, such as industrial 
production, orders and retail sales, also point to a 

deceleration in the underlying growth momentum in 
both regions in recent months.  All this suggests 
that the external headwind
s not only had a direct 
adverse impact on inflation and capital costs, but 
also an indirect one on confidence that, in turn, 
significantly weakened domestic demand.  
Looking forward, a full assessment of the risks will 
only be carried out in our next fully-fledged 
forecast scheduled for early November. 

Nevertheless, based on the partial assessment 
carried out in the interim forecast, activity is 
expected to remain subdued and downside risks 

prevail. 
Turning to the risks for the current update more 
explicitly and regarding the 
external environment
, developments in commodity and financial markets 

will continue to be the key factors shaping the 
growth outlook and downside risks to our 
assumptions in this regard are apparent. Although, 

the US economy has outperformed earlier 
expectations for the first half of this year, this was 
partly attributable to fiscal stimulus that is expected 

to have a temporary effect on growth. At the same 
time, the fall-out from the housing downturn, the 
credit crunch and higher ener
gy prices is unlikely to 
have fully materialised so far. Developments in this 
regards remain a source of considerable downside 

risk.  
As to 
internal factors
, some of the EU and euro-
area economies are also affected by domestic 
imbalances and/or by their 
capacity to adapt in view 
of their exposure to the financial turmoil and 
surging commodity prices. 
While there are specific 
circumstances in each 
country, significant 
corrections in the construction sector in 
combination with a sizeab
le external imbalance 
(such as Spain) or with a large and exposed 

financial sector (i.e. the United Kingdom), point to 
non-negligible tail risks in some countries.  
 
 Interim forecast, September 2008      12 Graph 14: Risks to the euro-area growth outlook 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0102030405060708
%lower 90%
lower 70%
lower 40%
upper 40%
upper 70%
upper 90%
central forecast
actual
 On the upside, growth in the US could rebound 
sooner and/or more strongly than expected. The 
resilience and underlying growth of emerging 

markets may also surprise positively. Within the 
EU economies, the labour market performance in 
some economies, especially Germany, has proved 

stronger than expected, which could, in 
combination with a falling inflation rate, provide a 
greater support to household consumption than 

assumed in our current forecast. Finally, 
commodity prices could also decline more rapidly 
than futures suggest, easing the inflationary 

pressures.  
Graph 14 quantifies these risks in terms of possible 
deviation of output growth from the main scenario. 
The graph shows the impact various combinations 
of risks could have on euro-area GDP growth 
(weighted by their probability). The relatively 

narrow fan, at the current juncture, is explained by 
the fact that there are on
ly two quarters remaining 
in 2008, while the fan chart refers to the annual 

growth rate.  
At a 90% confidence interval, GDP growth in the 
euro area could be 0.2 pp. lower in 2008 relative to 
the central scenario if downside risks materialise. 

But growth could also be up to 0.1 pp. higher if the 
upside risks to the outlook were to materialise.  
As regards 
the inflation outlook
, the risks identified 
in the spring forecast of a further up-tick in 

commodity prices have materialised and have had a 
first-round adverse impact on consumer price 
inflation.  
Moreover, some indirect effects have also been 
observed, as evidenced by the acceleration in 
inflation in some energy 
and food-related services, 
such as transportation. Wh
ile the expected slowing 
of employment growth and competitive pressures 
from globalisation could limit the overall 

acceleration of wage demand, still relatively tight 
labour markets in some sectors and/or Member 
States, as well as the use of wage-indexation in 

others, may lead to higher wage growth than 
assumed.  
On the other hand, in view of a general moderation 
of growth, domestic inflationary pressures should 
ease, supported by favourable base effects, 
particularly if commodity prices were to decline 

faster than futures prices currently suggest.  
Overall, the economic situation and outlook 
remains unusually uncertain Œ especially for periods 
beyond the forecast horizon of this interim forecast. 

Risks to the growth outlook remain more on the 
downside, while risks to the inflation outlook more 
on the upside as the euro area might witness some 

second-round effects on inflation in the rest of the 
year, although there is 
no evidence of any wide-
spread effects so far. 
Interim forecast, September 2008      13Growth and inflation prospects in the 
seven largest EU economies 
 1. Germany Œ marked slowdown despite sound 
fundamentals 
Real GDP in Germany decreased by 0.5% in the 
second quarter, having grown by an exceptionally 
strong 1.3% in the first quarter. Overall, economic 

activity thus remained fairly resilient in the first 
half of the year. It even expanded slightly more 
strongly than expected 
in the spring forecast, 
despite a deteriorating global economic 
environment. The contraction in the second quarter 

reflected mainly weaker gross fixed capital 
formation Œ largely due to a reversal of construction 
activity that was boosted by the favourable weather 

conditions in the first quarter Œ and sustained 
sluggish private consumption, which has been 
declining for three consec
utive quarters. At the 
same time, net exports continued to contribute 
positively to growth, even though this was mainly 
due to a deceleration in imports that more than 

compensated for a simultaneous drop in export 
growth. 
Although economic fundamentals remain strong, 
the growth outlook for the second half of this year 

has clearly deteriorated as higher inflation and the 
global economic slowdown are taking their toll. 
Robust employment growth, falling unemployment 

and rising wages have been insufficient so far to 
give any major boost to private consumption, with 
food and energy price hikes constraining disposable 
income and weighing heavily on consumer 
confidence, which is weakening rapidly. While 

price competitiveness rema
ins strong, exports are 
likely to be held back by lower growth in major 
trading partners. Moreover, despite the continued 

sound profit situation and the strong balance-sheet 
position of the corporate sector, which also implies 
a relatively limited impact of tightened credit 

conditions on private sector investment, the marked 
deterioration in business confidence during recent 
months is set to dampen investment growth. Taking 

into account the 
recent, significant decline in 
industrial production, a further contraction of 
economic activity in the third quarter cannot be 

excluded. However, with 
inflationary pressures 
gradually receding in the s
econd half of the year, a 
recovery of private cons
umption from its current 
low levels is expected to contribute to growth 

picking up again in the fourth quarter. 
Graph 15: Germany - consumer confidence and 
private consumption 
-20
2
4980002040608
yoy %
-30
-20
-10
010balance
Private consumption expenditure (lhs)
DG ECFIN Consumer confidence indicator (rhs)
 On the back of rising food and energy prices, 
annual inflation peaked at 3.5% in July 2008. Due 
to base effects and with little evidence of any 

second-round effects so far, 
this rate is expected to 
come down gradually until the end of the year to 
well below 3%. 
 2. Spain Œ a sharp worsening of economic 
prospects
 Economic activity in Spain is forecast to slow down 
to around 1½% in 2008, ¾ of a percentage point 
lower than the spring 
forecast. This sharp 
slowdown is mainly explained by the contraction of 
the housing sector on the economy which has been 
aggravated by the persistence of the turmoil in the 
financial sector and the 
higher than expected 
inflation stemming from higher oil prices. The 

Spanish economy™s double-digit current-account 
deficit, together with higher oil dependence than 
other European economies, are reinforcing the 

effect of the shocks on its economic activity. 
The moderation in growth in annual terms mirrors a 
contraction of domestic demand during the second 
half off the year in all components with the 

exception of public consumption. Private 
Interim forecast, September 2008      14 consumption alone, due to its high share of GDP, is 
largely responsible fo
r the lower economic 
expansion overall and is in line with developments 

of its economic fundamentals. Stagnating 
employment creation, mainly as a result of the 
contraction of the construction sector, and 

additional inflationary pressures are bringing about 
a deceleration of households' real disposable 
income. Moreover, access to credit for 

consumption, which in normal circumstances would 
partially alleviate a slowing growth of real 
disposable income, seems to be becoming more 
difficult as financial standards tighten. Likewise, 
investment is expected to 
decline during the second 
half of 2008 as a result of both the ongoing 
adjustment of the construction sector, which 
already started last year, 
and a weaker investment 
in equipment on reflecting worsened business 
expectations. Overall, GDP 
is projected to decline 
by 0.1% and 0.3% in Q3 and Q4 respectively. 
Graph 16: Spain - employment and GDP growth 
0.0
0.5

1.0
1.5
2.0

2.5

3.0
3.5
4.0

4.5
07Q107Q207Q307Q408Q108Q208Q308Q4
yoy %
-1.0
-0.5

0.0
0.5
1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5
3.0
3.5

4.0
yoy %
GDPgrowth (lhs)
Employment (QNA) (rhs)
Registered workers for social security. Q3-2008:Jul-Aug (rhs)
forecas
t Concerning the external sector, the growth 
contribution of net exports is expected to turn 
positive in 2008. While imports
 are forecast to slow 
down in line with the moderation in domestic 
demand, exports would maintain a relatively good 
performance, in spite of 
the projected deceleration 
among the main export partners, as sluggish 
domestic demand seems to be spurring Spanish 
exporters to open up new foreign markets. 
Inflation rose sharply, to 4.7%, in the second 
quarter of 2008. This is 0.6 of a percentage point 
above the spring forecast. 
The inflationary rebound 
is mainly explained by the increases in energy and 
food prices. The inflation differential vis-à-vis the 
euro area has widened during the last quarters, 

rising from about ½ percentage point in summer 
2007 to cross the threshold of one percentage point. 
In 2008, even though inflation is projected to 

decline by the end of the 
year to around 4%, the 
price increase for the year as a whole is not 
expected to depart substantially from the figure of 

4½%. The existence of wage indexation clauses 
raises the risk of persistence of inflationary 
pressures, although sec
ond-round eff
ects are not 
evident so far.  
 3. France Œ growth stalling  
The French economy lost momentum in the first 
half of 2008. GDP grew by 0.4% in Q1, as 

forecasted in the spring, but
 contracted sharply in 
Q2, by 0.3%, the weakes
t performance since the 
fourth quarter of 2001. The disappointing 

performance in the second
 quarter largely reflects 
the unexpected scope of th
e decline in investment 
and the very negative impact on growth of net trade 
in line with the contraction of the largest European 
economies, while private consumption, the 

traditional main engine of growth provided only a 
limited support for economic activity.  
Real GDP is expected to be almost flat in the 
second half of 2008, resulting in an annual growth 

rate of 1.0%, i.e. around half a percentage point 
lower than projected in the spring forecast. The 
available indicators for economic activity are rather 

negative. In both the services and the 
manufacturing sectors, the PMI indicators have 
fallen slightly below the critical threshold of 

stagnating activity, while in the construction sector 
the sentiment indicator seems to have stabilised at a 
low level in July. On the demand side, the 

deceleration in foreign de
mand, associated with a 
relatively strong euro (despite its more recent 
decline), and still unfavourable cost 

competitiveness, will continue to negatively affect 
export growth. Private consumption will remain 
subdued as households disposable income will be 
dampened by still-high inflation in Q3. In addition, 
the deterioration in labour market conditions, 

noticeable in the levelling 
off of the unemployment 
rate at 7.6% in Q2 (after declining for two years), 
Interim forecast, September 2008      15will not help improve the consumer confidence, 
which was at a historically low level in July. 
Investment is expected to put a drag on growth, as 

in Q2. Both productive and residential investment 
would suffer from the tightening of credit 
conditions and the growing credit cost (rises in 

mortgage interest rates and in interest rates to 
corporations), as well as from low demand 
expectations. In particular, residential investment is 

likely to contract again 
in the coming quarters in 
view of the limited number of housing starts. All in 
all, GDP will, at best, stagnate in the third quarter 
of 2008. 
For the fourth quarter, GDP 
is projected to increase 
by 0.1%, supported by slightly stronger private 

consumption, which will benefit from lower 
inflationary pressures and some positive impact 
from measures adopted at the beginning of 2008 to 

support purchasing power. 
Graph 17: France - GDP 
and domestic demand 
growth 
 Inflation in 2008 is expected to turn out at 3.5%, 
around half a percentage point higher than in the 
spring forecast, due to the acceleration of prices in 

the second quarter (+3.7% YoY) and the historical 
peak recorded in June and July (+4.0% YoY for 
each month). The main so
urces for the sustained 
high level of headline consumer prices were the 
surges in food and energy inflation in the second 
quarter. Inflation should remain close to 4% in the 

third quarter of 2008 and th
en ease to reach 3.3% in 
the fourth quarter, on the assumption of broadly 
stable oil prices and due to a gradual reversal of 

base effects. In addition, 
so far there is no evidence 
of second round effects, apart from the traditional 
annual indexation of the minimum wage on 
inflation. 
 4. Italy Œ economic growth at a standstill 
A marked slowdown of the Italian economy has 
been under way since mid-2007 and economic 
activity entered 2008 on a negative note. After the 
expected rebound in the first quarter, to 0.5% QoQ, 

real GDP is estimated to have contracted again by 
0.3% QoQ in the second quarter. The outcome for 
the first half of this year is thus somewhat lower 
than in the Commission's spring forecast. For the 
coming months, business confidence indicators for 

both the services and the manufacturing sectors 
suggest that economic activity remains subdued. In 
the current quarter,
 real GDP is forecast to stay flat 
QoQ (but negative YoY) and to increase only 
marginally in the final quarter. Economic activity in 
2008 as a whole is expected to grow by 0.1% only. 

This represents a downward revision of the already 
weak growth for
ecast in spring of 0.5% and implies 
no growth impulse into 2009. 
The stagnation of the econo
my mainly reflects the 
evolution of domestic demand. Under the impact of 
accelerating prices and negative wealth effects, 

private consumption has been lacklustre since the 
final quarter of 2007. It is expected to resume 
slightly in the final months of this year as inflation 

declines. As a consequence of the reduced demand 
and profitability as well as tighter financial 
conditions, firms have scaled back their investment 
plans. Residential investment is also bound to slow 
down as loans for house purchases have seen a 

sharp deceleration. As fo
r the external sector, 
imports are contracting in line with domestic 
demand developments, while exports are slowing 

down after the rebound recorded in the first quarter 
of the year. Prospects for the coming months 
remain unfavourable under deteriorating 

competitiveness and slowing world demand. 
Regaining cost competitiveness remains a 
challenge.   -3-2-10
1234
590929496980002040608
yoy%Contribution of domestic demand to GDP
growth
GDP growth (lhs)
forecasts
Interim forecast, September 2008      16 Graph 18: Italy - real GDP growth, inflation and 
contractual wages 
-0.5
-0.5

1.0

1.5
2.0
2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5
07Q107Q207Q307Q408Q108Q208Q308Q4
yoy %
GDP
HICP 
Contractual wages
forecast
 After reaching 3.8% in the second quarter, inflation 
is estimated to have peaked at around 4% in the 
third quarter. Under the assumption of lower energy 

prices, inflation should decelerate in the fourth 
quarter. Overall, year-on-year inflation in 2008 is 
expected to average 3.7%. However, accelerating 
domestic input prices could weigh on the diffusion 
and duration of inflati
onary pressures. Recent 
sizeable increases in wage
s despite low productivity growth, combined with still-limited competition in 
the non-tradable sector, may hamper a rapid decline 

of inflation.    
 5. The Netherlands Œ moderate growth in a 

cooling global environment  
In the course of the first half of 2008, economic 
activity slowed down considerably. After a robust 
QoQ increase of 0.4% in the first quarter, QoQ 
growth was flat in the second quarter, which is the 
lowest quarterly growth since the beginning of 
2005. The main factor explaining this poor growth 

performance was a downward correction of 
investment, which had expanded strongly in the 
first quarter, linked to some large incidental one-

offs such as the purchase of airplanes; overall 
investment surprised on the positive side as it rose 
by 4.5% in the first half, whereas net exports 

provided a negative contribution to growth of 0.7%, 
which reflects the sensitivity of the Dutch economy 
to the economic slowdown, 
especially in the euro 
area.  
In the second half of the 
year, GDP is expected to 
grow moderately, with quarterly growth of 0.3% 
and 0.4% in the third and fourth quarters 

respectively. Government expenditure is essentially 
driving growth. After a flat first half, it is expected 
to catch up also in view
 of a spending increase 
decided in the Spring memorandum. Private 
consumption growth is expected to be subdued, as 
high energy prices and an 
increase in indirect taxes 
in July have a negative impact on households' real 
disposable income. Furthermore, the financial 

turmoil and the international economic slowdown 
seem to be having a large negative impact on 
consumer confidence, which 
is currently at a very 
low point. As for investment, despite higher-than-
expected growth in the first half of the year, the 
underlying trend is weakening. There will be some 

downward pressure from an expected slowdown of 
demand combined with tightening credit conditions.  
  
Graph 19: the Netherlands - GDP growth, inflation 
and unemployment rate 
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0

1.5
2.0
2.5

3.0
3.5
4.0
07Q107Q207Q307Q408Q108Q208Q308Q4
qoq/yoy% 
1301501701902102302502702903103301000 of 
persons
GDP, qoq% (lhs) 
HICP, yoy% (lhs)
Unemployment, quarterly (rhs)
 The labour market still remains tight, with a very 
low rate of unemployment of around 3% (the 
lowest in the EU), and a high level of unfilled job 
vacancies. Despite this tight
ness, the latest round of 
wage bargaining concluded with moderate pay 
rises, and this could also be the case for the rest of 
the year, in view of the 
recent withdrawal of the 
VAT increase originally planned by the government 
for early 2009. Inflation is expected to peak in the 
Interim forecast, September 2008      17third quarter, especially 
for energy and unprocessed 
food, and also in view of the increase in indirect 
taxes in July. The decline of the price of oil as from 

July is likely to imply a decrease in inflation in the 
fourth quarter. 
 6. Poland Œ still robust growth in spite of 

worsening external conditions 
Economic activity continued to be strong in the 
second quarter of 2008. GDP growth is estimated to 

have reached 1½% quarter-on-quarter, about 0.4 
percentage point higher than in the Commission 
services' spring forecas
t. The positive growth 
surprise was due to continued strong private 
consumption and a less negative contribution of net 
exports. GDP growth is e
xpected to weaken to 
around 
 quarter-on-quarter during the remainder 
of the year.  For 2008 as a whole, GDP 
is expected to grow by 
5.4 %, which is ¼ percentage point higher than in 

the spring forecast. This
 follows from the better-
than-expected result in the first half of 2008.  
Domestic demand will continue to be the main 
driver of growth, with a key role for private 
consumption and gross fixed capital formation. 
Lower external demand due to slower growth in the 

EU and appreciation of the Polish currency will, 
however, slow down the Polish economy in the 
second half of the year. 
Graph 20: Poland - quarterly GDP growth and 
unemployment rate 
0123
4567807Q107Q207Q307Q408Q108Q208Q308Q4
67
8910
11
12%GDP (lhs)
Unemployment rate, quarterly averages (LFS) (rhs)
yoy %
 Consumption growth is being supported by rising 
nominal wages caused by a tight labour market. 
Between the first and seco
nd quarter of 2008, the 
employment rate increased by almost 1 percentage 
point and the unemployment rate was reduced 
correspondingly to 7.1%, which means nearly 

150,000 people found a job. The improvement is 
expected to continue, albeit at a much slower pace 
due to emerging skill mismatches and a worsening 

economic situation.   
After reaching 4.3% year-on-year in the second 
quarter of 2008, inflation is set to peak at around 4 
¾% in the third quarter on the back of strong wage 
demands, higher fuel prices and base effects from 
the previous year. Furthermore, expected hikes in 

energy utility prices will put pressure on inflation in 
the fourth quarter. Thus, inflation for 2008 has been 
revised upwards compared to the spring forecast 

from 4.3% to 4.5%.  
 7. The United Kingdom Œ domestic demand 
contracts as economy comes to a standstill 

 In the first half of 2008 economic activity in the UK 
slowed rapidly. In the first quarter growth of real 

GDP halved to 0.3% QoQ 
and in the second came 
to a standstill; after annual growth of 3.1% in 2007, 
this amounted to a slowdown in year-on-year 

growth from 2.3% in the first quarter to 1.4% in the 
second. In both quarters domestic demand 
contracted, subtracting 0.3% points respectively 
from quarterly growth. Consumer spending 
remained robust in the first quarter but dipped 

slightly in the second. Fixed investment contracted 
markedly in both quarters, particularly in the 
second, thereby substantially dampening growth. A 

sizeable rebound in invent
ories compensated for the 
investment weakness in the second quarter. Imports 
fell appreciably throughout the first half, against the 

background of broadly stable exports. The labour 
market began to turn: overall employment fell 
marginally and unemploym
ent increased somewhat 
in the second quarter. Emerging perceptions of the 
UK's sharply weaker performance, given its greater 
exposure to the ongoing weakness in both credit 

and equity markets, contributed to a further 
depreciation of the pound sterling. Between 
February and September this was around 7% on a 

nominal effective exchange rate basis, bringing 
Interim forecast, September 2008      18 total sterling depreciation to 15% since July 2007. 
UK policy rates were cut by a cumulative 50 basis 
points in February and April, but not further, given 

the sharply worsened inflation performance. 
 GDP growth in the second half of 2008 is expected 

to turn negative, with output contracting slightly in 
each quarter, driven by a 
continued weakening of 
domestic demand. Private consumption is likely to 

fall somewhat due to th
e combined impact of 
tighter credit conditions for household borrowing, 
weakening housing and labour markets and 
inflation-induced stagnation in real disposable 
income. Investment levels are expected to weaken 

further on account of still-
tight credit conditions, an 
uncertain business environment, both domestic and 
external, as well as a negative housing market 

outlook. While the lower exchange rate is likely to 
support export growth in the medium term, in the 
short-term weakness in overseas markets will 

constrain output gains from this source.  
 Overall, GDP growth for th
e entire year is forecast 
to fall to 1.1%, well under 
half that of the preceding 
year and more than ½% point weaker than expected 
in the Commission services
' spring 2008 forecast.  
 Graph 21: the United Kingdom Œ domestic demand 
and economic sentiment indicator 
-0.50
-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50

0.75

1.00
1.25
1.50

1.75
07Q107Q207Q307Q408Q108Q208Q308Q4
7075
808590
95100
105

110

115

120
Contribution of domestic demand to real GDP growth, qoq%
(lhs)
DG ECFIN Economic Sentiment Indicator, UK (rhs)
pps.index
forecas
t The year-on-year HICP inflation rate in July 2008 
rose sharply to 4.4%, up from 3.8% in June. 
Inflation is expected to peak in the third quarter 
2008 due to higher gas and electricity prices, and 

will be lifted by base effects from the previous year. 
These inflationary pressures are also evident in high 
producer price inflation, which reached 10.2% in 
July 2008, the highest rate in over 25 years. 
Average HICP inflation in 2008 is expected to be 

3.5%, somewhat higher than
 forecast in the spring, 
although inflationary pres
sures are expected to be 
progressively mitigated by demand weakness. 
Interim forecast, September 2008      19 Table 1: Real GDP growth 
2008/12008/22008/32008/4
Spring forecast 
April 2008
Interim forecast 
Sep. 2008Germany
1.3-0.5-0.20.2
1.81.8Spain 
0.30.1-0.1-0.3
2.21.4France0.4-0.30.00.1
1.61.0Italy
0.5-0.30.00.1
0.50.1Netherlands
0.40.00.30.4
2.62.2Euro area0.7-0.20.00.1
1.71.3Poland
1.41.50.70.6
5.35.4United Kingdom
0.30.0-0.2-0.2
1.71.1EU270.6-0.10.00.1
2.01.4Quarterly GDP forecast              
(%, quarter-on-quarter)
2008Annual GDP forecast
(%, year-on-year)
2008   Table 2: Consumer price inflation 
2008/1 2008/2 2008/32008/4
Spring forecast 
April 2008
Interim forecast 
Sept. 2008
Germany
3.13.03.32.7
2.93.0Spain 
4.54.75.04.0
3.84.5France3.33.73.83.3
3.03.5Italy
3.33.84.13.6
3.03.7Netherlands
1.92.03.63.5
2.72.8Euro area
3.43.63.93.4
3.13.6Poland
4.54.34.84.4
4.34.5United Kingdom
2.43.44.44.3
2.83.6EU273.63.94.23.7
3.63.8Quarterly HICP forecast             
(%, year-on-year)
20082008Annual HICP forecast
(%, year-on-year)
 Interim forecast, September 2008      20 Box: Technical background to the interim forecast 
 In February 2006, the Commission presented the first of 
what are now twice-yearly interim forecasts with the 
objective of updating its comprehensive spring and 
autumn economic forecasts (w
ith the next fully-fledged 
forecast scheduled for 3 November 2008). This interim 
forecast updates the outlook of the spring 2008 economic 
forecast of 28 April 
(http://ec.europa.e
u/economy_finance/publications/specp
ub_list9253.htm). The cut-off date for this interim 
forecast to take new information on board was 4 
September 2008. 
The interim forecast updates the outlook for seven 
Member States i.e. Germany, Spain, France, Italy, the 
Netherlands, Poland and the United Kingdom (which are 
the largest in the EU based on an average of the ranking 
in terms of both population and nominal GDP) as regards 
real GDP growth and HICP inflation for the current year. 
These updates are prepared
 using indicator-based 
forecasting models or judgemental forecasting 
techniques.  
Estimates for the European Union and the euro area are 
prepared using the nominal GDP-weighted updates for 
the largest Member States. These countries account for 
80% of the European Union and almost 85% of the euro 
area in terms of nominal GDP. The outlook for the 
smaller Member States, which have tended to grow faster 
than the larger ones, ha
ve not been updated. The 
Commission has made projections for the euro area and 
the EU using the updates for the five and seven largest 
Member States, respectively, and assuming that the 
revision for the smaller Member States is equal to that of 
the larger ones. 
Quarterly data are updated with the latest available 
information. When comparing quarterly with annual GDP 
growth it must be kept in mind that, whenever possible, 
quarterly data are adjusted for both seasonal influences 
and the number of working days while annual data is 
presented in unadjusted form
. As 2008 is a leap year, the 
working day adjustment is likely to be positive, estimated 
at 0.1 pp. for the euro area. 
  
 
 External conditions  
This forecast is based on a 
set of external assumptions. 
These assumptions are based 
on market expectations at 
the time of the forecast. To shield the assumptions from 
possible volatility during one
 specific trading day, 
averages from a 10-day reference period have been used 
for all technical assumptions.  
The technical assumption as regards exchange rates has 
been standardised using fixed nominal exchange rates for 

all currencies. They are kept constant based on the 
averages from 10 days up to 3 September, implying an 
annual average of USD/EUR of 1.51.  
Interest rates assumptions ar
e, since spring 2007, market-
based instead of expert-based. These assumptions should 
be interpreted with caution, as market-based assumptions 
do not only reflect policy rate
 expectations, but also 
liquidity conditions in this 
period of market uncertainty. 
Short-term interest rates for the euro area are derived 
from future contracts. Long-te
rm interest rates for the 
euro area, as well as short- and long-term interest rates 
for Poland and the UK are calculated using implicit 
forward swap rates, corrected for the spread between the 
3-month interbank interest 
rate and the 3-month swap-
rate. As a result, the short-term rate is at 4.8% and the 
long-term interest rates at 4.1% in 2008 for the euro area. 
The outlook for oil prices is based on futures prices. The 
price for a barrel of Brent crude oil is projected at 114.1 
USD/barrel in 2008 (corresponding to 75.6 EUR/barrel). 
This would be 12.9 USD/barrel (or 10.3 EUR/barrel) 
higher than assumed in the spring 2008 forecast, 
reflecting maintained strong 
demand from e.g. emerging 
markets and geopolitical uncertainties.  
Global demand in 2008 is revised downwards, following 
the recent distress in the financial markets and a weaker 
outlook for the US. However, a still relatively strong 
growth in emerging markets, especially China, limits the 
overall easing of global growth. Global GDP growth is 
thus forecast to slow to 3.7% in 2008 (down from 4.8% 
in 2007).  World trade is also set to slow in 2008, with growth in 
export and import volumes of 
goods estimated at below 
6%.   Interim forecast, September 2008      21 