ANNUAL REPORT 1999                                                            EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK
ENECB EZB EKT BCE EKPANNUALREPORT1999ANNUAL
REPORT
1999©European Central Bank, 2000AddressKaiserstrasse 29
D-60311 Frankfurt am MainGermanyPostal addressPostfach 16 03 19
D-60066 Frankfurt am MainGermanyTelephone+49 69 1344 0Internethttp://www.ecb.int
Fax+49 69 1344 6000
Telex411 144 ecb d
All rights reserved.Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
The cut-off date for the data included in this Report was 7 March 2000.ISSN 1561-4573ECB Annual Report Ł 1999
IIIContentsForeword2Chapter IEconomic development and monetary policy
1Monetary policy decisions in the context of the Eurosystem™s strategy
82Monetary and financial developments
112.1Monetary developments11
2.2Financial markets15
3Price developments
234Output, demand and labour market developments
285Fiscal developments
366The global macroeconomic environment, exchange rates and the balance
of payments39Chapter IICentral bank operations1Monetary policy implementation
481.1Liquidity management48
1.2The main refinancing operations49

1.3The longer-term refinancing operations50
1.4Other open market operations51
1.5Standing facilities51

1.6The minimum reserve system52
1.7The Eurosystem™s eligible collateral and its use for credit operations52
1.8Participation of Eurosystem counterparties in monetary policy operations53

1.9Money market developments54
2Investment of foreign exchange assets and own funds
542.1The foreign reserve assets of the Eurosystem54
2.2The Eurosystem™s approach to foreign reserve management55
2.3The ECB™s own funds management55
3Payment and settlement systems operations
563.1The TARGET system56

3.2The correspondent central banking model58
4Risk management
59
IVChapter IIIEconomic developments in the other countries of the European Union64Chapter IVEuropean/international co-operation and the Eurosystem

1European issues
741.1Bilateral relations74

1.2Co-ordination of national economic policies in the European Union77
1.3Macroeconomic Dialogue79
2International issues
802.1The activities of the ECB in the field of multilateral co-operation81
2.2The development of bilateral relations between the ECB and countries
outside the European Union84
2.3The architecture of the international monetary and financial system84
2.4The international role of the euro87
Chapter VPayment and securities settlement systems1Oversight of large-value payment systems
922Oversight of retail payment systems
923Other payment systems activities
944Securities settlement systems policy
94Chapter VIFinancial stability and prudential supervision
1The institutional framework for financial stability
982Structural changes in the EU banking and financial sector
1003Macro-prudential analysis
1014Risk assessment systems and credit registers
102
VChapter VIIThe production of the euro banknotes and preparationsfor the cash changeover1Production of the euro banknotes
1062The quality of the euro banknotes and coins
1063Protecting the euro banknotes and coins against counterfeiting
1074The EURO 2002 campaign
1075The changeover to the euro banknotes and coins in 2002
1086Cash circulation before 2002
109Chapter VIII
Development of the statistical framework114Chapter IXOther tasks and activities1Advisory functions
1202Compliance with the prohibitions on monetary financing and privileged
access1213Transition to the year 2000
1224The administration of the borrowing and lending operations
by the European Community
125Chapter XPublic information and accountability1The ECB™s information policy and its tools
1281.1Communication policy objectives128
1.2Communication tools128
2Accountability
1292.1Central bank independence and accountability in Economic and
Monetary Union129
2.2The role of the European Parliament in holding the ECB to account130

VIChapter XIThe institutional framework of the Eurosystem and
the European System of Central Banks
1The Eurosystem and the European System of Central Banks
1342The decision-making bodies of the ECB
1352.1Governing Council135
2.2The Executive Board137

2.3The General Council138
3The organisation of the ECB
1403.1Corporate governance140
3.2Staff developments140
3.3The organisational chart of the ECB141
4ESCB Committees
142Chapter XIIAnnual Accounts of the ECB and Consolidated Balance Sheet of the
Eurosystem 1999145AnnexesGlossary164Chronology of monetary policy measures of the Eurosystem176
Documents published by the European Central Bank (ECB)
181List of Boxes, Tables and Charts
Boxes1Structural changes in the banking sector and their relevance for monetary policy15
2Assessing the factors behind the rise in nominal bond yields using index-linked bonds20
Chart: Break-even inflation rate calculated for the French CPI20
3The effects of market deregulation on consumer prices25
Chart: Telephone and telefax equipment and services25
4Growth and inflation divergences in the euro area29
Table: Real GDP growth and HICP inflation in euro area countries29
5The decline in the surplus of trade in goods of the euro area in 199944
Chart: Import volumes of major euro area export markets44

VII6The function and activities of the ECB permanent representation in Washington, D.C.82
7Consultation procedures in 1999120
Tables
1Price and cost developments in the euro area23
2Composition of real GDP growth in the euro area28

3Industrial production in the euro area32
4Labour market developments in the euro area34
5Fiscal positions in the euro area36

6Macroeconomic indicators for Denmark65
7Macroeconomic indicators for Greece67
8Macroeconomic indicators for Sweden69

9Macroeconomic indicators for the United Kingdom70
10Quantity of euro banknotes to be produced by 1 January 2002110
Charts1ECB interest rates and money market rates9
2M3 growth in the euro area11
3Components of M3 in the euro area12
4Loans to the private sector and retail interest rates14

5Short-term interest rates in the euro area17
6aLong-term government bond yields in the euro area, the United States and Japan18
6bTen-year interest differential of the United States against the euro area18

7Stock price indices in the euro area, the United States and Japan22
8Breakdown of HICP inflation in the euro area by components24
9Contributions to quarterly real GDP growth in the euro area30

10Confidence indicators in the euro area32
11Total employment in the euro area33
12Unemployment in the euro area34

13Main developments in major industrialised economies41
14Nominal effective exchange rate42

VIII
IXAbbreviationsCountriesBEBelgium
DKDenmark
DEGermany

GRGreece
ESSpain
FRFrance

IEIreland
ITItaly
LULuxembourg

NLNetherlands
ATAustria
PTPortugal

FIFinland
SESweden
UKUnited Kingdom

JPJapan
USUnited States
OthersBISBank for International Settlements
BPM4IMF Balance of Payments Manual (4th edition)
BPM5IMF Balance of Payments Manual (5th edition)

CDscertificates of deposit
c.i.f.cost, insurance and freight at the importer™s border
CPIConsumer Price Index

ECBEuropean Central Bank
ECUEuropean Currency Unit
EMIEuropean Monetary Institute

ESA 95European System of Accounts 1995
ESCBEuropean System of Central Banks
EUEuropean Union

EUReuro
f.o.b.free on board at the exporter™s border
GDPgross domestic product

HICPHarmonised Index of Consumer Prices
ILOInternational Labour Organization
IMFInternational Monetary Fund

MFIsMonetary Financial Institutions
NCBsnational central banks
reposrepurchase agreements

SITC Rev. 3Standard International Trade Classification (revision 3)
In accordance with Community practice, the EU countries are listed in this Bulletinusing the alphabetical order of the country names in the national languages.
XForewordECB Annual Report Ł 1999
2This is the first ECB Annual Report coveringa full year of Eurosystem monetary policy. Italso deals with the other activities of the
Eurosystem and the European System of
Central Banks.Looking back on the first year of the euro,
there are grounds for experiencing a senseof satisfaction. The single monetary policy
started under reasonably favourableconditions inherited as a result of soundpolicy measures adopted in the run-up to

the introduction of the euro. In addition, the
Eurosystem™s monetary policy strategy
proved to be a valuable tool both for making
monetary policy decisions and in explainingthese decisions to the general public.
Throughout the year, the Eurosystem was
therefore able to focus on maintaining theenvironment of price stability, with inflationrunning on average at just over 1%. The fact
that prices could be kept stable in the euroarea is an achievement that should not beunderestimated. An examination of the not

too distant past should make that clear. Inthe past half century price stability has been
the exception rather than the rule. The
Eurosystem will, therefore, continue to
explain the importance of its primaryobjective of maintaining price stability in theeuro area and its monetary policy will
continue to be conducted with a view to
achieving this objective. There are, however,
limits to the power of monetary policy. Itcannot, for instance, prevent short-termfluctuations in price developments.  Instead,

monetary policy must focus on the mediumterm and be assessed from a medium-termperspective. Moreover, monetary policy
needs the support of sound fiscal policies, of
structural policies that aim to ensure that
markets operate efficiently, as well as of
responsible behaviour on the part of wage
negotiators.The Eurosystem must act as a single unit andas a truly European body, which means thatdecisions always need to be taken from an

area-wide perspective. Monetary policy is oneand indivisible; it cannot react to situationsin individual countries or regions in the euro
area. In any monetary union of the size of theeuro area it is inevitable that inflation andother economic developments will not be
completely uniform across all the countriesinvolved. The existence of such differences,unless they exceed certain levels, should be
seen as normal, as shown by the experiencein other large monetary unions, such as theUnited States. However, should differences

threaten to become too large, the policyresponse can only be provided nationally, byfiscal policy, structural policies and the

adaptability of the markets.In late 1998 and during the first months of1999 the euro area economy experienced aslowdown in growth at a time when inflationwas already low. The financial crises in Asia
and Russia made themselves felt in Europe. Abroadly based assessment of the outlook forprice developments and the risks to price
stability, the second pillar of our monetary
policy strategy, on balance pointed to furtherdownward pressure on prices. The first pillar
of the strategy, a prominent role for money
with an analysis of monetary growth relativeto its reference value, showed a rate of
growth of M3 of around 5% in early 1999.
This was still relatively close to the reference
3value of 4½%. It seemed likely that thechangeover to the euro itself had affectedmonetary growth in early 1999. It did
not appear, therefore, that monetary
developments in early 1999 implied a risk to
price stability in the medium term. Thus,taking the information of both pillars
together, the Governing Council of the ECBdecided on 8 April to reduce the ECB™s mainrefinancing rate by 50 basis points, to 2.50%.
Following this rate cut, nominal short-terminterest rates in the euro area were at
historically low levels. This contributed to an
environment in which the growth potentialof the euro area could be exploited without
endangering price stability.In the course of 1999 downward risks toprice stability receded and upward risks came

to the fore, with their magnitude graduallyincreasing. The difference between the
growth of money and its reference value

continued to widen, while credit granted tothe private sector grew by an annual rate in
excess of 10%. The liquidity in the euro area
was ample, while ECB interest rates wererelatively low. All these developments wereindicative of upward risks to price stability in

the medium term. At the same time, upwardpressures on prices came from the continuedrise in oil prices and from the depreciation of

the euro exchange rate in an environment
where the economic outlook started tobrighten up. Therefore, both pillars of the
monetary policy strategy pointed toincreasing risks to price stability in themedium term. On 4 November 1999 the
Governing Council raised the three mainECB interest rates by 50 basis points.Subsequently, on 3 February and 16 March
2000, it was decided to increase theseinterest rates by a further 25 basis points ineach case. The timing of all these moves

demonstrated the forward-looking characterof the Eurosystem™s monetary policy; byacting before risks become reality, later
sharper increases in interest rates can beavoided. Rather than nipping economicrecovery in the bud, such policy measures
contribute to creating one of the conditionsfor lasting strong economic growth.The euro is new and the ECB and theEurosystem are young. Little more than ayear has passed since the euro wasintroduced. The actual introduction of the

euro, including the technical aspects of theprocess, went smoothly. The first few weeksof January 1999 saw the integration of the
money markets in the euro area. The
operational framework of the Eurosystem,with its use of refinancing operations,
standing facilities and a minimum reservesystem with an averaging provision,functioned remarkably well. Overnight
interest rates were generally very stablewithout the need to resort to fine-tuning
operations.  The ECB conducted only one

fine-tuning operation in early 2000 to mopup some excess liquidity after the successfultransition to the year 2000.The Eurosystem is naturally taking a keeninterest in developments related to the
possible expansion of the euro area. That iswhy developments in EU Member States
which have not yet adopted the euro are
analysed carefully.  The Eurosystem values itswork with these Member States in theGeneral Council of the ECB. The Eurosystem
also closely monitors the process ofaccession of new Member States to the
European Union. Ultimately, these countries
have to fulfil the convergence criteria and
can then adopt the euro. In this context, theEurosystem has established contacts with the

central banks in all the accession countriesand is ready to contribute to the accessionprocess within its fields of competence.So far, I have focused mainly on the activitiesof the ECB and the Eurosystem. However,
immediately upon its launch the euro startedto have an impact on the financial sector as awhole, the euro area economy in general and
the global monetary system. The euroimmediately became the second mostimportant currency at the global level. The
impact of the euro is ongoing and willincrease in scope in the years to come. The
euro will change the euro area economy and,
indeed, has already begun to do so. Existing
trends in the financial sector were boosted
4by the launch of the euro. Generally speaking,
the role of financial markets in the allocation
of financial resources is growing relative tothe role of financial intermediaries. The depth
and liquidity of capital markets are increasing.Some segments of the capital market which
had previously been underdeveloped, such as
the corporate bond market, have grownsignificantly. In general, turnover in thefinancial markets was high, showing that the
euro was well received.Greater integration of the capital markets is
still possible, and would be helped bymeasures to level the playing-field further.This also applies to the creation of a single

market for financial services. The Eurosystemhas, for example, emphasised the fact thatretail payment systems, which reduce the
costs and increase the speed of cross-borderpayments, have to be developed forimplementation no later than the date on
which the euro banknotes and coins are putinto circulation.Pressures to restructure mounted in 1999,as also evidenced by high merger andacquisition activity, and not only in the
financial sector. In the financial sector alltypes of intermediaries and institutions, frombanks to stock exchanges, are affected, as
are payment and securities settlementsystems. Although mergers and acquisitions
are often still national in character, this may
well change in the future. The euro stimulates
competition by enhancing transparency, andcross-border comparisons become simpler
within the euro area. This has a favourableeffect on the functioning of the Single Marketand thereby ultimately enhances economic
welfare. This process will be given a furtherboost by the introduction of euro banknotes
and coins. The introduction of the euro also
implies that differences in the quality of
economic policies of countries in the euroarea are more easily exposed. This should be
seen as an opportunity for governments tolearn from each other and to discover andadopt best practices. Structural changes in
the euro area are carefully monitored andanalysed by the Eurosystem, since they mayhave an impact on the way in which and thespeed with which monetary policy measuresaffect the economic process and, in particular,inflation. From a more general perspective,

an efficient and sound euro area financialsystem is important, since this also facilitatesthe conduct of monetary policy.There are also some changes not directly
related to the introduction of the euro which
call for the attention of the Eurosystem. Thedevelopment of electronic money impingeson all major central bank functions: monetary
policy, the concern to maintain financialstability, banking supervision and theoversight of payment systems. The
Eurosystem attaches great importance to theadoption of a sound regulatory frameworkfor issuers of electronic money. As this
Annual Report goes to press, progress hasbeen made in this area in the European Union,but the current proposals for regulation leave
room for further improvement. Thisconcerns, in particular, provisions to ensure
that only supervised credit institutions are
allowed to issue significant amounts ofelectronic money, that the Eurosystem canextend its monetary policy instruments to

issuers of electronic money, and thatelectronic money should always beredeemable at par value.The transition to the new millennium turned
out to be a non-event, thanks largely to the

meticulous preparations in many sectors,including the financial sector and theEurosystem. The euro got off to a good start,

but making the euro and Economic andMonetary Union a success is clearly a long-term process. The Eurosystem will play its

part in endeavouring to ensure that success.Work in all the areas mentioned above, andin others, will continue this year and beyond,
with a view to further establishing the euroand the Eurosystem, its infrastructure and itspolicy framework.The economy of the euro area isnow entering a crucial phase. A golden
opportunity to achieve substantial reductionsin the level of unemployment throughout the

5euro area and to revitalise the economy isarising, now that economic growth isaccelerating in a climate of price stability.
This opportunity can only be seized if policy-
makers make the right choices and theprivate sector is confident about the futureand thus dares to take initiatives. Firmly

focusing on maintaining price stability in themedium term is the best contributionmonetary policy can make to reducing
unemployment. At the same time, this would
further enhance the credibility of theEurosystem and boost the confidence of
citizens that their currency, the euro, willretain its value over time. In line with the
Stability and Growth Pact, budgetary
authorities should reduce their budgetdeficits to close to balance, or even createsurpluses. Governments should translatetheir intentions to undertake structuralreforms enabling markets to operate moreflexibly into deeds and build on the measures
which they have already taken. In wagenegotiations social partners should take intoaccount the importance of maintaining price
stability, the growth of productivity, the need
to reduce unemployment and the fact that
different local circumstances require
differentiated wage developments; weshould all consider the future as offeringopportunities to bring welfare to European
citizens; we should all seize these
opportunities, thereby fostering Europe™s
development into a major dynamic force in
the world economy.Frankfurt am Main, March 2000Willem F. Duisenberg
6Chapter IEconomic developmentsand monetary policyECB Annual Report Ł 1999
8IMonetary policy decisions in the context of the Eurosystem™s
strategyIn accordance with its statutory obligations,the primary objective of the Eurosystem is to
maintain price stability in the euro area. Inorder to achieve this objective, monetary
policy decisions are taken in a forward-looking manner based on a stability-orientedstrategy. This strategy was adopted in

October 1998 (see the article in the January
1999 issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin
entitled ﬁThe stability-oriented monetary
policy strategy of the Eurosystemﬂ). To
summarise, the Governing Council of the ECBannounced a quantitative definition of price
stability, namely an annual increase of below2% in the Harmonised Index of ConsumerPrices (HICP) for the euro area. It was also
stated that price stability is to be maintained
over the medium term. In order to assess
the outlook for price developments and the
risks to future price stability, a two-pillar
approach was adopted. The first pillar assignsa prominent role to money, signalled by the
announcement of a reference value for thegrowth rate of a broad monetary aggregate.In December 1998 the reference value was
set at an annual growth rate of 4½% for M3.Monetary developments in relation to thereference value are analysed on an ongoing
basis for the information that they containregarding future price developments over themedium term. In the context of the second

pillar, a broadly based assessment isundertaken of other indicators containing
information about the outlook for price
developments and the risks to price
stability in the euro area. This assessmentencompasses a wide range of financial market
and other economic indicators, includingforecasts. Against this background, monetarypolicy does not react mechanically to
developments in a single indicator or forecast.Rather, based on a thorough analysis of the
information provided by the two pillars of its
strategy, the Governing Council sets theinterest rates on the monetary policyinstruments of the Eurosystem at the level
which will best serve to maintain pricestability in the medium term.
The interest rates on the three mainmonetary policy instruments at the start ofStage Three of Economic and Monetary Union(EMU) were officially announced on
22 December 1998. The decision followed a
co-ordinated interest rate reduction by thenational central banks, decided upon earlier
in December 1998, which had virtuallycompleted the process of convergence of theofficial interest rates in the countries that

now form the euro area. On 22 December
1998 the rate on the first main refinancingoperation to be conducted in 1999 was set at
3.0%. In addition, the rate on the marginallending facility was set at 4.5% and that onthe deposit facility at 2.0%, both with effect
from 1 January 1999. As a temporarymeasure, in order to smooth the transitionto a single money market, the Governing
Council of the ECB adopted a ﬁnarrow
corridorﬂ for short-term market interestrates from 4 to 21 January 1999 by setting
the interest rates on the marginal lendingfacility and the deposit facility at 3.25% and2.75% respectively (see Chart 1 and the
section entitled ﬁChronology of monetarypolicy measures of the Eurosystemﬂ).In the first quarter of 1999 price pressurescontinued to be weak. HICP inflation stood
at 0.8% in December 1998 and remained at

that level in January and February 1999. Inthis environment of low inflation, signsemerged that the extent of the slowdown of
economic activity in the euro area Œ mainlycaused by weaker external demand Œ might
be greater than had been anticipated in
late 1998. Figures on real GDP growth
pointed to a significant economic slowdown.Furthermore, industrial production growth
was weakening and business confidence wasdeclining continuously. Therefore, it becameincreasingly clear at that time that the risks
to price stability in the medium term were
mainly on the downside.
However, in assessing the outlook for price
stability, it was also necessary to take into9
account the fact that some indicators
appeared to point in the opposite directionin early 1999. In particular, the three-monthaverage of the annual growth rates of M3 for
the period from December 1998 to February1999 was around 5.0%, i.e. somewhat inexcess of the reference value. The January
monetary data showed a significant increasein overnight deposits. In addition, credit tothe private sector was growing fast, at a rate

of around 10% in early 1999. Furthermore,despite the economic slowdown, consumerconfidence remained comparatively high.
Finally, oil prices started to rise as from mid-February 1999 and the euro depreciated ineffective terms in the first few months of
1999, two factors which were also able toexert upward pressure on prices.The Governing Council was therefore facedwith some conflicting signals in early 1999.With regard to monetary developments,
however, M3 growth was still close to thereference value of 4½%. In addition, it
appeared that the special environment
resulting from the changeover to Stage Threeof EMU had contributed significantly to thesharp increase in overnight deposits in
January. The partial reversal in the growthof overnight deposits, which occurredin February, strengthened this view.Furthermore, it could not be ruled out thatinstitutional factors, such as changes in thestatistical reporting systems and the move to
the new minimum reserve system, had playeda role in the exceptionally strong monetarygrowth in January. Therefore, given the

uncertainties surrounding the analysis ofmonetary developments in early 1999 andthe modest deviation from the reference
value, the Governing Council did not regardmonetary developments as implying upwardrisks to price stability at that time.All in all, in an environment where currentinflation rates were significantly below the upper
limit of the Eurosystem™s definition of price
stability and in view of downward pressures onfuture price developments associated with a
weakening in economic activity, the Governing
Council decided on 8 April to reduce the mainrefinancing rate by 50 basis points to 2.5%. On
the same occasion it lowered the rate on themarginal lending facility by 100 basis pointsto 3.5% and that on the deposit facility by
50 basis points to 1.5%, thereby establishing asymmetrical interest rate corridor around
the rate on the main refinancing operations.
These policy moves were deemed appropriateas a precautionary measure to preserve pricemarginal lending ratedeposit ratemain refinancing rateone-month interest rate (EURIBOR)overnight interest rate (EONIA)Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1
19992000
1.01.5
2.0
2.5
3.03.54.0
4.55.01.01.5
2.0
2.5
3.03.54.0
4.55.0Chart 1ECB interest rates and money market rates(percentages per annum; daily data)Sources: ECB and Reuters.
10stability in the medium term and, in doing so,contribute to better exploiting the growthpotential of the euro area economy.Later on in the year the balance of risksgradually moved from the downside to theupside. The three-month moving average of
the annual rate of M3 growth followed agradually rising trend, approaching 6.0% overthe summer. Even when excluding the
exceptional developments at the verybeginning of 1999, a protracted monetaryexpansion was evident. The annual growth
rate of overnight deposits remained high. Inparallel, credit to the private sector continuedto expand rapidly, confirming that liquidity
was ample.At the same time the external environmentstrengthened as the Asian economies
stabilised and then started to recover, while
concerns about financial turmoil in other
emerging markets receded. In addition,economic activity in the United States showedcontinuing signs of strength. In this
environment, economic activity in the euroarea progressively recovered. The first signs
of this process were observed in the

substantial improvement in businessconfidence over the summer. Industrialproduction stabilised in the second quarter
of 1999 and accelerated in the third quarter.The steady increase in bond yields over the
summer also signalled market expectations
of an improvement in long-term economicconditions, as well as some increase ininflation expectations. Overall, it gradually
became clear that economic activity in the
euro area was set to accelerate significantlyin the course of 1999 and in the year 2000.

Moreover, the effective exchange rate of the
euro weakened further and oil pricescontinued to rise, both of which were
gradually feeding through to consumer prices.It was therefore evident that the balance ofrisks to price stability had been progressivelymoving upwards since the beginning of thesummer and that the downside risks which
were present at the time of the reduction in
ECB interest rates in April no longer
prevailed. Against this background, theGoverning Council decided on 4 November1999 to raise the rate on the main refinancingoperations by 50 basis points, to 3.0%. On
the same occasion the rates on the depositfacility and the marginal lending facility werealso raised by 50 basis points, to 2.0% and

4.0% respectively.This change in the stance of monetary policywas expected to prevent the ample liquidity
from translating into upward pressureson prices over the medium term and
to contribute to maintaining inflationexpectations safely below 2%. It was alsoconsidered that such a timely rise in interest
rates would contribute to avoiding the need
for stronger measures later on and, hence,would help to sustain non-inflationary growth
over an extended period of time. The size ofthe move was also aimed at removinguncertainties about the near-term course of
monetary policy, thereby contributing toreducing any uncertainty premia potentiallyprevalent in financial markets. In addition, it
aimed to help contain a possible increase involatility in money markets in the period oftransition to the year 2000.At its meeting on 2 December 1999 theGoverning Council reviewed the reference
value for monetary growth, in accordancewith the announcement it had made in
December 1998. It was decided to confirm
the reference value for monetary growth,namely an annual growth rate of 4½% for thebroad aggregate M3. This decision was taken
on the grounds that the componentsunderlying the derivation of the firstreference value in December 1998, namely
the Eurosystem™s definition of price stability(an annual increase of below 2% in the HICPfor the euro area) and the estimates of trend
real GDP growth (2% to 2½%), as well as thetrend decline in M3 income velocity (½% to
1%), had basically remained unchanged.The Governing Council also decided that, asbefore, monetary developments would be
assessed in relation to the reference value onthe basis of a three-month moving average of11
annual growth rates of M3. Furthermore, itre-emphasised that this assessment would bemade in parallel with the broadly based
assessment of the outlook for price

developments constituting the second pillarof the Eurosystem™s strategy. Monetary policydecisions aimed at the maintenance of price
stability over the medium term would thuscontinue to be based on the informationobtained from both pillars of the strategy.

Finally, it was decided henceforth to review
the reference value for money on a regularannual basis, with the next review to take
place in December 2000.In late 1999 and early 2000 monetary andcredit growth continued to signal ampleliquidity in the euro area. At the same time,developments in the exchange rate and incommodity prices continued to contribute toincreases in import prices and costs in theeuro area. As such increases were larger and

more protracted than previously foreseen,
the risk of second round effects on consumer
prices rose significantly, particularly at a time
when economic activity in the euro area was
picking up strongly. As both of the pillars ofthe monetary policy strategy of the
Eurosystem were seen to indicate upwardrisks to price stability, the Governing Councilof the ECB decided twice, on 3 February and
16 March 2000, to raise the interest rates on
the main refinancing operations, the depositfacility and the marginal lending facility by 25
basis points in each case.Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
 1997  1998  1999 
3.04.05.06.07.03.04.05.06.07.0M3M3 (three-month centred moving average)reference value (4 1/2%)Chart 2M3 growth in the euro area
(annual percentage changes)Source: ECB.2Monetary and financial developments
2.1Monetary developments
M3 growth in excess of the reference value
The annual growth rate of the broad monetary
aggregate M3 increased gradually throughout

1999. The three-month average of the annual
growth rates of M3, covering the period fromOctober to December, stood at 6.0% (seeChart 2). This compares with 4.8% in the last
quarter of 1998. Accordingly, M3 growth
increasingly deviated from the reference valueof 4½%. On average in 1999 M3 grew by 5.7%,
compared with 4.9% in 1998 and 4.1% in 1997.
12The monetary expansion in 1999 was fosteredby the low level of opportunity costs ofholding, in particular, the most liquidcomponents of M3. Moreover, the economic
upturn in the euro area is likely to havespurred money demand for transactionpurposes. Furthermore, one-off portfolio
reallocations relating to the introduction ofthe euro and the new reserve requirementregime appear to have affected M3 growth at

the beginning of the year. Overall, themonetary expansion reflected ample liquidityfor most of 1999.Turning to the individual components of M3,the growth of currency in circulation
recovered in 1999, after having been verysubdued in the previous year. In the fourth
quarter of 1999 the annual increase of
currency in circulation reached 6.4%,compared with only 0.4% in the last quarterof 1998 and 2.7% in the last quarter of 1997
(see Chart 3). The economic upswing and
the low opportunity costs of holdingbanknotes may have supported this upward
trend. In addition, a temporary rise in theprecautionary demand for currency wasrecorded shortly before the transition to theyear 2000.Overnight deposits grew at a very rapid pace
in 1999, although the rate of expansionmoderated somewhat in the last part of theyear. In the last quarter of 1999 the annual
rate of increase stood at 12.7%, comparedwith 10.6% in the fourth quarter of 1998 and9.3% in the corresponding period of 1997. A

surge in the demand for overnight depositsoccurred in January 1999, reflecting thespecific circumstances prevailing at the start
of EMU. In addition, the low levels of inflation
and interest rates and the resulting lowopportunity costs of holding overnight
deposits, as well as the economic upswing inthe euro area may explain the relativelystrong demand for overnight deposits in
1999.By contrast, as in previous years, short-term
deposits other than overnight deposits(namely deposits redeemable at a period ofnotice of up to three months and deposits

with an agreed maturity of up to two years)showed a rather subdued expansion in 1999.Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
199719981999
-10-505101520-10-505101520currency in circulationovernight depositsother short-term depositsmarketable instrumentsChart 3Components of M3 in the euro area
(annual percentage changes)Source: ECB.13
In the last quarter of 1999 the annual rate of
increase was 1.7%, compared with 2.6% inthe fourth quarter of 1998 and 1.1% in thecorresponding period of 1997. The apparently

low level of attractiveness of these other
short-term deposits for investors may berelated to the fact that the spread between
the interest rate on these deposits and thaton overnight deposits narrowed significantlyin the first three quarters of the year and
remained comparatively low thereafter.Moreover, the steepening of the yield curvein 1999 may have been accompanied by shifts

towards investments in longer-term financialassets. In addition, in some countries portfolioshifts out of these other short-term deposits
were probably related to a significant declinein inflation expectations over recent years.After having dropped significantly at the endof 1998 and the beginning of 1999, thedemand for the other instruments included
in M3 (negotiable instruments and repurchaseagreements) recovered significantlythroughout 1999. In the last quarter of 1999
the annual growth rate stood at 5.2%,compared with 2.5% in the last quarter of1998 and 7.3% in the last quarter of 1997.
The recovery in the course of 1999 was
mainly due to a significant increase in thegrowth of both money market fund shares

and debt securities issued with a maturityof up to one year. The demand for thesecomponents may have been temporarily
spurred by uncertainties in financial markets,in particular in late summer and autumn,regarding the future development of bond
yields. Under such circumstances short-termmarketable assets, which are relatively liquidand offer a return higher than that on
deposits with an agreed maturity of up to
two years, are often used to park funds for
some time. Moreover the attractiveness of
these instruments was increased by the risein short-term market rates after the end ofSeptember. Balance of payments statistics for
some euro area countries suggest that thegrowth of money market fund shares andmoney market paper as well as of debt
securities in 1999 was partly a result ofpurchases of these instruments by non-euro
area residents. Although the concept of M3
only refers to monetary holdings of euro arearesidents, statistical limitations do not, at the
current stage, permit negotiable securities
issued by MFIs and held by non-residentsto be identified separately. While thissuggests that some caution should be
exercised when interpreting the developmentof these marketable instruments, the overallassessment of monetary growth in 1999 is
judged not to be significantly affected.In January 2000 the annual rate of M3 growthfell significantly, to 5.0%, from 6.2% inDecember 1999. However, this was mainlythe result of a base effect, i.e. the fact that
owing to the special environment at the start
of Stage Three of EMU the monthly increasein M3 in January 1999 was exceptionally
strong.Strong expansion of credit
Turning to the counterparts of M3 in the
consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector,the annual rate of expansion of credit tohouseholds and corporations was between
10% and 11% for most of the year. Among
the components of credit to the private
sector, the outstanding amount of loans
(which accounts for around 90% of total
credit to the private sector) grew at an annualaverage rate of 10.0% in 1999 and it continued
to expand strongly in January 2000 (at 8.7%on an annual basis). This compares withannual average growth rates of 8.3% in 1998
and 6.6% in 1997. Data on the breakdown ofMFI loans to euro area residents bycounterpart sector, type of loan and original

maturity indicate that this strong expansionof loans was broadly based across the privatesector.The dynamic expansion of loans tohouseholds and corporations probably mainly
reflected the low level of bank lending interestrates compared with historical experienceand the pick-up in economic activity in the
euro area. In the first half of the year retail
lending interest rates for all types of loans
14continued on the declining trend which hadbeen apparent over previous years (see

Chart 4). Subsequently, interest rates onloans for house purchase and longer-termloans to enterprises showed a rising trend,
reflecting, with a time-lag, the increase incapital market interest rates which began inMay 1999. Towards the end of 1999 the
higher interest rates in money markets, whichanticipated some tightening in monetarypolicy, led to a moderate increase in bank
lending rates on consumer loans and short-term loans to enterprises. The fact that the
growth of loans remained strong despite
rising interest rates suggests that the pick-upin economic activity is likely to have playedan important role in sustaining the high

growth of loans to the private sector in thelatter part of 1999, although there may alsohave been some frontloading of borrowing
during this period owing to expectations onthe part of private agents of further increasesin bank lending rates. Other contributing

factors in 1999 were the intense merger and
acquisition activity (see Section 2.2), whichtended to be partly financed by short and
medium-term loans, and the interactionbetween mortgage loans and rapidly risingreal estate prices in some euro areacountries.The growth of credit to general governmentremained subdued throughout 1999, at an
annual average rate of 1.1%. This slow rate ofgrowth occurred both in loans and in MFIholdings of government debt securities and

was in line with the diminished financingneeds of the general government sectorobserved in 1999.As regards other counterparts of M3, longer-
term financial liabilities of the MFI sector grew
at a relatively strong pace in 1999 (an annualgrowth rate of 7.3% was recorded in thefourth quarter, compared with 4.7% in the
last quarter of 1998), in line with thesteepening of the yield curve.
Finally, during 1999 the net external assetposition of the MFI sector declinedsignificantly on an annual basis (by
166 billion). The decline mirrored the factthat overall the transactions of euro areanon-MFI residents with non-euro area
residents resulted in a net outflow of funds.Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
 1997  1998  1999 
4.05.06.07.08.09.010.011.012.04.05.06.07.08.09.010.011.012.0loans to the private sectorretail rate on loans to enterprises up to one yearretail rate on loans to enterprises over one yearretail rate on consumer creditretail rate on housing loansChart 4Loans to the private sector and retail interest rates
(loans: annual percentage changes; interest rates in percentages per annum)Source: ECB.15
2.2Financial markets
Rapid growth of corporate financing
through debt securities issuanceThe start of Stage Three of EMU has acted asa catalyst for the development and integration
of the euro area capital markets towards apan-European capital market.With regard to the euro-denominated bond
market, the most significant development in
1999 was undoubtedly the rapid growth ofthe private or corporate bond market, which
surpassed the expectations of many observersprior to the launch of the euro. This marketgained momentum with the launch of large

debt securities issues which were related toa number of sizeable mergers and acquisitions
in the first half of 1999. The rather smoothBox 1Structural changes in the banking sector and their relevance for monetary policyDevelopments in the competitive environment of financial services and the related structural developments inthe banking sector are of relevance for the single monetary policy. In the past, banks in the euro area have beenthe main providers of financial services in rather fragmented and sheltered domestic markets. However, as
barriers between various domestic or local markets have been reduced, banks are facing more competitionfrom one another as well as from other providers of financial services. These changes in the competitiveenvironment have resulted in pressure for banks to become more efficient and have prompted initiatives to

maintain competitive positions, one manifestation of which is the merger and acquisition activity, which has
gathered pace significantly over the past few years. This pattern of restructuring and consolidation continuedin 1999. In particular, the number of large institutions involved in bank mergers was relatively high throughout
1999.The main driving forces behind this trend towards restructuring and consolidation in the euro area bankingsector are technological developments, globalisation, deregulation and increased demand for sophisticatedfinancial services, with the introduction of the euro appearing to have acted as a catalyst for these forces.Indeed, these driving forces are seen to be reshaping the market so that financial services should become more

competitive and also more integrated both within the euro area and at the global level.However, most of the merger and acquisition activity in the euro area banking sector has not so far taken placeacross national borders within the euro area. The focus on national mergers may be explained by an incentiveto improve efficiency by removing overlapping operations as well as by defensive strategies. In addition,issues related to cultural proximity and expectations that mergers and acquisitions at the national level are
more manageable than cross-border mergers also seem to play an important role. This national orientationtowards mergers and acquisitions has given rise to some concerns about the increased market shares of thelargest domestic institutions. However, while some adverse effects on competition at the local level cannot be
ruled out in the short term, the main picture emerging in respect of the financial services market seems to beone of increased competition and reduced fragmentation in the long term.These changes in the competitive conditions in the banking market, as well as the possible effects on thefinancial strength of the banking sector, may be of relevance for the transmission mechanism of monetary
policy. First, the speed of monetary policy transmission may be enhanced, as banks in more competitive

markets tend to adjust their retail interest rates more rapidly in response to changes in market rates. Second,the relative importance of the credit channel of monetary policy may be altered as a result of changes inrelationships between banks and their clients, which are particularly relevant for the financing of small
businesses and households. Finally, increased competition in the euro area would tend to speed up the movetowards a more integrated banking system across participating countries, which could reduce cross-country
asymmetries in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.
16and rapid way in which the euro-denominatedcorporate bond market proved able toabsorb these issues was widely regarded asan important sign of the increased depth of
this market. In particular, the issuance of
euro-denominated debt securities by privatenon-financial corporations and private utility
companies increased in 1999 compared with1998. According to commercial data sources,the largest private issuers of debt securities
in 1999 were banks, which accounted for
the bulk of total private sector issuancevolume, followed respectively by non-financial
corporations, other financing companiesand utility companies. Taking a globalperspective, the growth of net issuance of
euro-denominated debt securities during1999 was particularly strong when comparedwith US dollar denominated debt securities
issuance. Yen-denominated issuance alsoexperienced a strong recovery in 1999 whencompared with 1998.One of the most important factors behindthe growth in the euro-denominated
corporate bond market has been the ongoingprocess of corporate restructuring in Europe,which has resulted in a strong demand for
funds in the private corporate sector. Ingeneral, merger and acquisition activitiesundertaken by euro area companies grew
considerably in 1999, for both the bankingand the non-banking industry (see Box 1).
Euro area companies involved in merger and
acquisition activities and operations such asleveraged buyouts Œ in which the takeover ofa company is financed through the issuance
of high-yield bonds Œ financed these deals, to
a significant extent, with large euro-denominated debt securities issues, which
often served to repay bridging facilities(mainly syndicated loans). This led to some
very large issues, unprecedented in the
history of European capital markets. The
significant growth in private euro-denominated debt securities issuance was
accompanied by a reduction in the relative
importance of the public sector in the debt
securities markets in 1999, which also
reflected the relatively smaller increases inthe financing needs of the public sector in1999 compared with previous years. Inaddition, a shift in demand towards higherrisk securities in order to obtain higher
returns owing to the historically low levels of
interest rates also seemed to play asupportive role in the growth of corporatedebt securities issuance.As discussed in the article in the January 2000
issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin entitled
ﬁThe euro area one year after the
introduction of the euro: key characteristicsand changes in the financial structureﬂ, there
were a number of notable developments inthe euro area capital markets during 1999.These included closer co-operation between
national stock exchanges and thedevelopment of electronic trading platforms
in both bond and stock markets.Money market rates mirroring ECB interestratesIn 1999 the ECB managed to steer short-term money market rates by means of theinterest rate which was applied to the mainrefinancing operations. The overnight interest
rate, as measured by the EONIA (the ﬁeuro
overnight index averageﬂ), was generally veryclose to the rate applied to the main
refinancing operations, the average spreadbetween the two rates being equal to 3 basispoints in 1999 (see Chart 1). The volatility of
the EONIA rate was relatively low. Somewhatlarger fluctuations were normally onlyrecorded towards the end of the reserve

maintenance periods, which is when theminimum reserve constraint on the banking
system becomes binding. In view of the steady
pattern of the EONIA rate, the ECB saw no
need to conduct fine-tuning open marketoperations in the course of 1999.
Other money market rates were equallystable, apart from episodes when market
participants anticipated a move in ECBinterest rates or, towards the end of the
year, when short-term interest rates rose on

account of market concerns related to thetransition to the year 2000.17
At the beginning of 1999 the money marketyield curve was more or less flat, withEURIBOR interest rates for maturities fromone to twelve months fluctuating in a narrow
range of between 3.21% and 3.26% (seeChart 5). Subsequently, during the firstquarter, money market interest rates
declined, reflecting gradually enhanced market
expectations of declining short-term interestrates in the near future.After the announcement of the decision ofthe Governing Council to reduce ECB
interest rates on 8 April 1999, money marketrates declined further. Since the GoverningCouncil made it clear at the time of the cut

in interest rates that it did not intend toreduce its rates any further in the periodahead, the money market yield curve regained

a positive slope directly after the event. Inthe course of the summer, as expectationsregarding the gradual improvement of
economic conditions in the euro area were
increasing and monetary developmentstended to show an increasing deviation of M3
growth from the reference value, moneymarket rates gradually increased, reflecting astrengthening of market expectations of an
increase in ECB interest rates. This process
continued in the autumn and, by the time thedecision to raise these interest rates was
announced on 4 November 1999, moneymarket rates had fully anticipated this move.In the days following the announcement, the
volatility of money market interest rates fell
significantly.The analysis of developments in short-terminterest rates was complicated, however,particularly in the last part of 1999, by the
effect of market concerns about the impact
that the transition to the year 2000 might
have on money market interest rates. The
associated risk premium led to a pronouncedchange in market rates as soon as they
spanned the end of the year. This leap was
most pronounced for rates at the short endof the money market curve (see Box 3 onpages 19 to 21 of the December 1999 issue
of the ECB Monthly Bulletin). However, after
the successful transition to the year 2000,the risk premium in money market rates

quickly disappeared.In January 2000 the slope of the moneymarket yield curve was positive, with thespread between the one-month and twelve-month EURIBOR being equal to
approximately 80 basis points. Towards theend of January money market interest ratesJan.Feb.Mar.Apr.MayJuneJulyAug.Sep.Oct.Nov.Dec.Jan.Feb.
19992000
2.42.6
2.8
3.0
3.23.43.63.8
4.04.24.42.42.6
2.8
3.0
3.23.43.63.8
4.04.24.4one-month EURIBORthree-month EURIBORsix-month EURIBORtwelve-month EURIBORChart 5Short-term interest rates in the euro area(percentages per annum; daily data)Source: Reuters.
18moved upwards, in anticipation of thedecision to raise ECB interest rates whichwas announced on 3 February 2000. In thecourse of February, money market interest
rates gradually increased further.Long-term bond yields increase from
historical lows as growth prospects brightenFollowing the prolonged decline in long-term
interest rates which was observed inindustrialised countries throughout much of
the 1990s, long-term government bond yieldsin the euro area reached their lowest levelsfor the past 50 years in early 1999 (see
Chart 6(a)). From May 1999 onwards,however, they began to edge upwards, initiallyled by bond yield increases in the United
States and by an increase in inflationexpectations from the very low levels
prevailing in early 1999, but later on
increasingly due to brighter economicprospects for the euro area. Overall, in theeuro area, ten-year bond yields increased by
more than 150 basis points in 1999, reaching
a level of around 5.5% by the end of the year.Similarly, in the United States the ten-year
bond yield rose by around 180 basis points,to around 6.5%, in 1999. As a result of thesedevelopments the spread between US and
euro area ten-year bond yields widenedslightly during 1999, reaching 100 basis pointsby the end of the year. In Japan developments
in long-term bond yields differed somewhat
from the euro area and the United States.
Following initial declines from the relatively
high levels reached in the aftermath of thefinancial turbulence in late 1998, Japaneselong-term yields seemed to stabilise at a level
below 2% in the second half of 1999. Between
the end of 1998 and the final trading day of1999, the ten-year bond yield in Japan

declined by approximately 40 basis points, toaround 1.6%.The main factor underlying developments inglobal bond markets in 1999 was a pick-up inworldwide growth expectations as concerns
of a prolonged global growth downturn,which had existed in the financial markets as
Source: Reuters.Note: Long-term government bond yields refer to ten-year bonds
or to the closest available bond maturity.Chart 6(a) Long-term government bond yields in the
euro area, the United States and Japan(percentages per annum; daily data)(b) Ten-year interest rate differential of the United
States against the euro area(percentages per annum; daily data)19951996199719981999
0.02.04.06.0
8.010.00.02.04.06.0
8.010.0euro area United States Japan 19951996199719981999
-3.0-2.0-1.00.01.02.0-3.0
-2.0-1.00.01.02.0a result of the financial turbulence of 1998,began to recede. The US economy continuedto grow at a remarkable pace throughout1999 and, although there were few visible
signs of rising inflation, the increasing
tightness in the labour market resulted ingrowing concerns in financial markets that
the US economy was growing at a rate thatmight lead to inflationary pressures in the19
economy. To a large extent, these
developments contributed to the substantialincrease in US long-term bond yieldswitnessed throughout 1999. In addition,

although a further improvement in the fiscalsituation in the United States may havereduced the pressures on capital markets
from the public sector, a sizeable increase incorporate bond issuance in the United Statesduring the year may have placed upward
pressure on US bond yields.By contrast with developments in the UnitedStates, long-term bond yields in the euro arearemained broadly stable in the first fourmonths of 1999, reflecting the more sluggish
pace of economic recovery and the subduedinflationary pressures in the euro area whichwere reflected in the decision of the
Governing Council of the ECB to lower
interest rates in April. Apart from theaforementioned spillover effect of the

continued rise in US bond yields, it seems
likely that part of the gradual increase inbond yields as from May resulted from the
unwinding of the safe-haven portfoliopositions that had been built up during 1998,as well as an increase in inflation expectations
from the very low levels prevailing in early
1999 in the wake of the financial turbulenceof the previous year. Developments in the
pricing of French index-linked bonds at thistime appeared to be consistent with thosefactors behind the increase in nominal bond

yields (see Box 2). In addition, as was thecase in the United States, a significant increasein the level of corporate bond issuance
activity in the euro area may have put upward
pressure on long-term bond yields. However,the increase in euro area bond yields in May
and the first half of June 1999 was much lesspronounced than in the United States,reflecting differences in cyclical positions,
leading to a substantial widening of the long-term interest rate differential vis-à-vis the
United States up to a maximum level of

almost 160 basis points in mid-June. Later on,as increasing signs of an economic recoveryin the euro area appeared, the spread
between US and euro area long-term bondyields narrowed rapidly (see Chart 6(b)).Until the end of October 1999 long-termbond yields in the euro area continued tofollow an upward trend. As from the end ofOctober, growing expectations in capital
markets that ECB interest rates were to beraised in a context of increasing evidence ofupward price pressures, and the subsequent

decision on 4 November, temporarily led tosignificant declines in long-term bond yields.
This seemed to suggest that, as a result of
the decision to raise interest rates, marketparticipants had revised their long-terminflation expectations downwards and
lowered the magnitude of the inflation risk
premium required for holding euro-denominated bonds. However, during the
remainder of 1999 euro area bond yieldsedged up again, partly following upward
movements in long-term yields in the United

States and partly in response to furtherpositive news regarding the outlook for theeuro area economy. As a result of the more
pronounced increases in US bond yields, theyield differential vis-à-vis the United Statesbegan to increase again in November and
December.The developments described above were alsoreflected in movements in the euro area yieldcurve throughout 1999. Between the firstand the last trading day of 1999 the slope of
the yield curve, as measured by the differencebetween ten-year euro area bond yields andthe three-month EURIBOR interest rate,
increased by around 140 basis points to 215basis points. The main part of this increasetook place during the first nine months of
1999. Since the yield curve typically becomessteeper in advance of a pick-up in the pace ofeconomic activity, the observed steepening
of the euro area yield curve in 1999 seemed
mainly to reflect increasing optimism on thepart of market participants about future
economic prospects and an increase ininflation expectations from the very low levels
prevailing in early 1999. However, caution
should be exercised when interpreting overallyield curve movements, as other factors, suchas the unwinding of safe-haven portfolio
positions and spillovers from US bond
markets may also have influenced long-term

20Box 2Assessing the factors behind the rise in nominal bond yields using index-linkedbondsIn order to assess how various underlying factors may have influenced nominal long-term bond yields in the
euro area in 1999, it is useful to remember that, broadly speaking, the nominal yield on a government bond
with a specified time to maturity can be broken down into three elements. These are the real interest rate
required by investors for holding the bond until it matures, compensation for the average expected inflationrate during the life of the bond, and a component associated with term or risk premia linked to, inter alia,uncertainty about future rates of inflation. The yield on index-linked bonds can assist in producing this
breakdown. The differential between a long-term bond yield and the real yield available on an index-linkedbond of the same maturity is generally known as the ﬁbreak-evenﬂ inflation rate. This is because with this rateof inflation, the expected return to an investor will be the same regardless of whether the investment is made in
a fixed nominal income or an index-linked bond.However, the break-even inflation rate is not a direct measure of inflation expectations because it does not takeinto account the role of various risk premia. On the one hand, the break-even rate tends to over-estimateexpected inflation since the yield on the nominal bond usually contains an inflation risk premium. On the otherhand, the lower level of liquidity that usually characterises index-linked bond markets implies that the real
yield on index-linked bonds may incorporate a liquidity premium. The only index-linked bonds that exist inthe euro area were issued by the French Treasury with 10-year and 30-year maturities. The break-eveninflation rate of these bonds refers to a specific measure of the French Consumer Price Index (CPI), namely
the CPI excluding tobacco, and does not refer to the euro area HICP. These properties illustrate the limitations
of this indicator for evaluating developments in the euro area.Nevertheless, bearing these caveats in mind, developments in 1999 in the pricing of ten-year index-linkedbonds issued by the French Treasury provided some indications that both improved growth expectations andchanges in inflation expectations may have played important roles in determining movements in nominal
long-term interest rates during the year. Between the end of 1998 and the end of 1999 the real interest rateavailable on the ten-year French index-linked bond increased by around 50 basis points. At the same time, theBreak-even inflation rate calculated for the French CPI(in percentages; daily data)Sources: French Treasury, ISMA and Reuters.Note: The real bond yields are derived from the market prices of French bonds which are indexed to the French CPI (excluding
tobacco) and mature in 2009. The nominal bond yields are derived from the market prices of French fixed income bonds which
also mature in 2009.Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1
19992000
199801
2
345
60
1
2
345
6break-even inflation ratenominal bond yieldreal bond yield21
ten-year break-even inflation rate increased by approximately 110 basis points from the extraordinarily low
levels observed in early 1999, at a time when risks to price stability were perceived to be mainly on the
downside (see the chart above).It is worth noting that the rise in the real yield and the increase in the break-even inflation rate occurred duringdifferent periods of 1999. While the break-even inflation rate increased steadily in the second quarter andlevelled off after June, the real interest rate increased mainly in the second half of the year. This suggests thatthe increases in nominal euro area bond yields were initially attributable more to inflation expectations
increasing from very low levels than to increasing real rates. However, the unwinding of the safe-haven
portfolio positions from emerging markets that had been built up during 1998 might also help to explain partof the increase in long-term interest rates in the first half of 1999, since they may have artificially compressed

the break-even inflation rates prevailing in the early months of 1999. Spillovers from rising bond yields in theUnited States may, at times, also have played a role in this rise in break-even inflation rates in the first half of1999. Later on, as more and more signs of an economic recovery appeared, the rise in nominal bond yields
related more to increasing long-term real interest rates, while the break-even inflation rate remained stable.
interest rate developments in the euro areain 1999.In the first half of January 2000 euro area
bond yields showed some limited increases,mainly as a result of spillovers coming fromUS bond markets, where yields rose
significantly. Subsequent to this, bond yieldsin the euro area remained broadly stable forthe rest of January and throughout the
following month. At the same time, thedifferential between euro area and US long-
term interest rates was somewhat volatile

and did not exhibit any discernible trend inearly 2000.Global stock prices increase significantlyIn 1999 stock prices in industrialisedeconomies showed large increases, continuingthe upward trend observed over previous
years (see Chart 7). A very large increasewas seen in the euro area, where by the endof December 1999 the Dow Jones EURO
STOXX index stood 40% above end-1998levels. In the United States, by the end ofDecember 1999 the Standard and Poor™s 500
index was 19% above end-1998 levels, while
in Japan a significant increase of 37% was alsoobserved for the Nikkei 225 index. The main
factor underlying developments in global
stock markets during 1999 seemed to havebeen improving market assessments of futureglobal growth prospects.Throughout most of 1999 the evolution ofglobal stock market developments provided
a supportive environment for stock pricedevelopments in the euro area. The principal
source of the increase in US stock pricesseemed to be favourable expectations of
future corporate earnings growth, linked to
the robust pace of activity in the US economy.
In particular, optimism about the long-termearnings growth prospects for high-
technology firms played an important role.Against this background, the NasdaqComposite index (which contains a high
proportion of technology stocks) increasedby 86% in 1999.Japanese stock prices appeared to benefit
from increasing optimism about the prospectsfor future corporate earnings growth linked
to a recovery in the Japanese economyparticularly during the first half of 1999,before stabilising in the second half of 1999.

At the same time the decline in long-termgovernment bond yields in Japan seemed tohave played a supportive role in the increase
in Japanese stock prices, as did thedepreciation of the Japanese yen vis-à-vis theUS dollar during the first half of 1999,
particularly with regard to the stock pricesof export-oriented companies.22Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1
199719981999
4060
80100120
140
1604060
80
100
120
140
160euro areaUnited StatesJapanStock prices in the euro area remained relativelysubdued in the first few months of 1999,reflecting the sluggish pace of economicrecovery in the euro area. Later on, as
expectations regarding the pace of future activitybegan to improve, stock prices in the euro areastarted to edge upwards. The resilience of this
increase to the parallel increases in long-termbond yields in the euro area was notable andappeared to indicate strong underlying
expectations for corporate profitability anddividend growth in the euro area. Theimprovement in stock prices was initially more
apparent for those firms with a higher degreeof exposure to the external economicenvironment than in the stock prices of firms
with a more domestic orientation. To the extentthat larger firms tend to have a higher degreeof exposure to the external economic
environment, this was indicated by the strongerperformance of the Dow Jones EURO STOXX50 index, which is composed of large
corporations, compared with that of the broadDow Jones EURO STOXX index.In the second half of 1999, as marketparticipants became more optimistic withregard to the prospects for domestic demandgrowth in parallel with improvements inbusiness and consumer confidence, stockprice increases became more broadly based
across the different sectors of the economy.Towards the end of the year, particularlyafter mid-October, relatively sharp stock
price increases were seen in the technologyand telecommunications sectors. In thesesectors, by the end of 1999, stock prices had
increased by 134% and 105% respectivelycompared with the end of 1998, whichcontributed significantly to aggregate euro
area stock price increases. Increases in thetechnology and telecommunications sectorsseemed to be partly linked to favourable
profit growth expectations followingcorporate restructuring and mergers andacquisitions activity in these sectors and
significant expansion of the internet business.In the period from end-1999 to 7 March 2000contrasting developments were seen ininternational stock markets. While stockprices in the United States, as measured by
the Standard and Poor™s 500 index, declinedby 8%, in Japan the Nikkei 225 index rose byChart 7Stock price indices in the euro area, the United States and Japan(1 January 1999 = 100; daily data)Source: Reuters.Note: Dow Jones EURO STOXX broad (stock price) index for the euro area, Standard and Poor™s 500 for the United States and
Nikkei 225 for Japan.23
5%, while in the euro area the Dow JonesEURO STOXX index rose by 11%. Continuing
the trend that became evident in the lattermonths of 1999, stock prices in the

technology sector of the euro area rose by36% during this period and made a significant3Price developments
Upward trend in the HICP inflation rate
during 1999 mainly due to oil pricesOn average, the Harmonised Index of
Consumer Prices (HICP) increased by 1.1%in 1999, i.e. the same rate of increase as
that recorded in 1998 (see Table 1).This unchanged annual increase concealsa significant contrast between thedevelopments in the HICP during 1999 bycomparison with 1998. While the rate of
inflation declined during 1998, it mainly rose
during 1999 (see Chart 8). This upward trendprimarily reflected factors that wereexternal to the euro area and, specifically,

developments in the world market price ofoil. By contrast, domestic sources ofinflationary pressure remained relatively
contribution to the general increase in stockprices. Similarly, in the United Statestechnology stock prices also exhibitedsignificant increases, with the Nasdaq

Composite index rising by 19%.1997199819991999199919991999199919991999199920002000
Q1Q2Q3Q4Sep.Oct.Nov.Dec.Jan.Feb.
Harmonised Index ofConsumer Prices (HICP)
and its componentsOverall index1.61.11.10.81.01.11.51.21.31.51.72.0.

of which:
Goods1.20.60.80.30.60.91.51.11.31.51.92.2.
Food1.41.60.51.30.6-0.20.4-0.10.40.40.50.4.
Processed food1.41.40.91.20.80.70.90.60.80.91.01.0.

Unprocessed food1.42.00.01.40.3-1.4-0.3-1.2-0.4-0.2-0.2-0.5.
Industrial goods1.00.11.0-0.20.61.42.11.71.82.02.63.1.
Non-energy industrial goods0.50.90.60.80.60.50.50.50.50.60.50.7.

Energy2.8-2.62.2-3.90.54.67.86.16.37.210.012.0.
Services2.31.91.61.71.61.51.51.41.41.51.61.6.
Other price and cost indicatorsIndustrial producer prices 1)
1.1-0.80.0-2.6-1.30.73.11.42.23.14.15.0.
Unit labour costs 2)
0.70.0.1.61.60.7.------
Labour productivity 2)
1.71.5.0.10.51.0.------
Compensation per employee 2)
2.41.5.1.72.01.7.------
Total hourly labour costs 3)
2.51.7.2.02.02.4.------
Oil prices (EUR per barrel) 4)
17.112.017.110.315.019.723.021.820.823.524.824.927.6
Commodity prices 5)
12.9-12.5-3.1-16.0-8.21.114.06.610.711.919.319.420.0
Table 1Price and cost developments in the euro area(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)Sources: Eurostat, national data, International Petroleum Exchange, HWWA Œ Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung (Hamburg) and ECBcalculations.
1)Excluding construction.

2)Whole economy.

3)Whole economy (excluding agriculture, public administration, education, health and other services).

4)Brent Blend (for one-month forward delivery). In ECU up to December 1998.

5)Excluding energy. In euro; in ECU up to December 1998.

24subdued in 1999. By December 1999, overallHICP inflation stood at 1.7% year-on-year,
compared with 0.8% in December 1998.
Inflation increased further to 2.0% year-on-yearin January 2000, mainly reflecting the persistence
of the increase in oil prices.Over the course of 1999 oil prices increasedfrom 10.3 per barrel in the first quarter toan average of 23.0 per barrel in the fourthquarter, reflecting a gradual but significant
recovery in the world market price of oil andalso a depreciation in the euro™s exchangerate vis-à-vis the US dollar. This rise, which
reversed a steady decline observed in 1998,was swiftly reflected in the energy componentof the HICP; by December 1999 energy
prices, which include a large excise component,had increased by 10% year-on-year, withmost of the increase concentrated in
liquid fuel prices. Other energy componentsexhibited a more stable pattern of increase
or were, as in the case of electricity prices
in some euro area countries, subject
to downward pressure associated with
deregulation. In addition, increasing oil priceswere to some extent offset by downward
pressure from other prices. In particular,unprocessed food prices made a significantnegative contribution to the rate of increase
in consumer prices.Underlying price increases were moresubduedApart from the relatively volatile componentsdescribed above, consumer price increases werefar more subdued in 1999, with the rate of
increase in the HICP excluding energy pricesand seasonal food declining to 1.0%, comparedwith an average of 1.4% in 1998. This reflected
significant declines in the rate of increase in theprice of non-energy industrial goods, servicesand processed food. In the case of the non-
energy industrial goods component of the HICP,
the pass-through from rising producer priceswas relatively limited in 1999. Developments in
producer prices, in turn, mainly reflectedincreases in oil and non-oil commodity prices,Chart 8Breakdown of HICP inflation in the euro area by components(annual percentage changes; monthly data)Source: Eurostat.1996199719981999
-6-4
-20
246
810
12-6
-4
-20
246
8
10
12total HICPservicesunprocessed foodprocessed foodnon-energy industrial goodsenergy25
Box 3The effects of market deregulation on consumer pricesIn a number of sectors of the euro area economy there have been ongoing efforts to liberalise markets in orderto ensure that firms are operating on a commercial basis and in a competitive environment. This process,which increases the overall efficiency with which resources are used, is viewed as making a positive
contribution to overall economic welfare. In many cases, the liberalisation process can give rise to downward

pressure on prices and profit margins. Market liberalisation continued in 1999 and, while it is difficult toseparate clearly the price effects of liberalisation from the impact of other factors such as technologicalchange, it was associated with a further decline in the prices of a number of goods and, in particular, services.The telecommunications market provides the most striking example of the extent of the impact of increasedcompetition on consumer prices. While liberalisation of EU telecommunications markets began in some
countries in the 1980s, it accelerated over the course of the 1990s, in parallel with rapid technologicalinnovation. In principle, most telecommunications markets in the EU have been completely opened up to
competition since 1 January 1998, following the implementation of several European Council Directives.Telephone and telefax equipment and services(index: December 1997 = 100; monthly data)Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Further significant price declines in the telecommunications sector in 1999This ongoing increase in competition has been reflected in consumer prices, as measured in the telephone andtelefax equipment and services component of the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP). In the twoyears between December 1997 and December 1999, this component has fallen by just over 7.1% in absolute

terms. To the extent that it takes time to include new operators in the index, the HICP may not be reflecting thefull scale of the reduction in prices. Relative to both the overall HICP and services prices, the decline has beeneven more marked (see the chart above). Moreover, it would appear that competition intensified across the
euro area during 1999 and, as a result, the decline in prices was particularly noteworthy. Significant reductionsoccurred in Germany, the Netherlands, Ireland and Luxembourg. In Finland, where the process of liberalisationbegan much earlier, recent price decreases have been less significant. In a number of other euro area countries,
the benefits of increased competition are being passed on to consumers more gradually in the form ofstaggered price reductions or ﬁprice capsﬂ which are determined by the appropriate national authority.It is likely that the relative price declines outlined above have stimulated increased demand fortelecommunications equipment and services. In the telecommunications sector it is also important to note thatQ1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
19981999
90929496
9810010290929496
98100102absolute price levelprice level relative to the services componentprice level relative to the HICP
26with the increase in the latter mainly being theresult of the depreciation in the nominaleffective exchange rate of the euro. Comparedwith an average increase of 0.9% in 1998, non-

energy industrial goods prices had increased by0.5% year-on-year by December 1999. Similarly,the rate of increase in services prices remained
subdued in the course of the year and stoodat 1.6% in December 1999, i.e. 0.3 percentage
point lower than the average increase in services
prices in 1998. These developments reflectedslightly higher but still moderate growth in euro
area labour costs (see below) and alsodownward pressure on profit margins in somesectors Œ most visibly telecommunications Œ as
a result of market liberalisation. (See Box 3 for

a further discussion of these effects.)Rebound in unit labour costs but underlyingwage growth remained moderateUnit labour costs are estimated to haveincreased by 1.6% year-on-year by the secondtechnological innovation has been an additional driving force behind the aforementioned price developments.A good example of this is the increased availability of low-cost and high-quality mobile telephone technology.
However, the role of technological innovation cannot be completely separated from the process ofmarket liberalisation because increased competition may have strengthened the incentives for firms toinnovate and to undertake research and development. In addition, 1999 saw an increase in merger activity in
the sector, which holds the prospect of further price reductions if it succeeds in producing additional efficiencygains.Some evidence that liberalisation began to take hold in the energy sector in 1999While the liberalisation in the European energy sector is lagging behind the above developments intelecommunications, there was evidence in some euro area countries that it was beginning to take holdtowards the end of 1999. This comes in the wake of a number of EU initiatives aimed at establishing aninternal market for the provision of energy. The Electricity Market Directive of 1996 and the Gas Market
Directive of 1998 were designed to ensure that firms in these sectors can operate on a commercial basis and inan environment which is open to competition. A deadline of 19 February 1999 was set for the implementationof the Electricity Market Directive, although transition periods of one year were granted in the case of Ireland

and Belgium and two years in the case of Greece. The Directive calls for an initial liberalisation of around25% of the market, with this proportion rising to around one-third by 2003. However, a number of euro areacountries have already gone beyond these requirements. A deadline of 10 August 2000 was set for the
implementation of the Gas Market Directive in the Member States of the EU. According to the Directive, atleast 28% of the market should be opened up by 2003, with this percentage rising to 33% by 2008.As yet, it is difficult to detect strong signs of pervasive downward pressure on prices or profit margins in euroarea energy markets. This is partly because the process of energy market liberalisation has only just begun inmost euro area countries. Price developments in this sector may also be strongly influenced by other factors,
such as changes in primary fuel prices, government regulations or energy taxation. Nonetheless, the disparityin electricity prices across the euro area suggests that there is significant scope for price reductions. Indeed,towards the end of 1999, electricity prices began to fall in some countries, most notably in Germany. The fall
in prices has not only been a consequence of actual competition; in some countries that have opened theirmarkets only partially, prices for consumers have been reduced in anticipation of the changes in supply and
demand conditions that the full future opening of the market will bring.While the effects of deregulation and increased competition have been most clearly evident in thetelecommunications and the electricity sectors, it is likely in the years ahead that these effects will be observed
in other sectors, such as the gas market and also transportation.27
quarter of 1999, by contrast with 1998, duringwhich they had remained unchanged onaverage (see Table 1). This increase
mainly reflected lower productivity growth
associated with the deceleration of euro area
activity in 1998 and also some increase innominal compensation per employee. In
addition, the rate of increase in total hourlylabour costs showed some upward movementand stood at 2.4% year-on-year in the
third quarter. Against this background, in thethird quarter higher productivity growth,
associated with the gradual strengthening ofeconomic activity, gave rise to a decelerationin unit labour cost growth to 0.7% year-on-year. Profit margins are estimated to havenarrowed marginally in 1999 compared with

1998. This is explained by the above increasein unit labour costs and by higher energy andnon-oil input prices (as reflected in, for

example, the price of intermediate goods).In some sectors, as mentioned above,competitive forces may also have restrained

firms from passing increased input costs intooverall consumer prices.
284Output, demand and labour market developments
Progressive upturn in real GDP growth inthe course of 1999Economic activity in the euro area in 1999was characterised by a progressive upturn in
output growth, following the slowdown inthe course of 1998. In retrospect, the adverseeffects of the crisis in emerging market
economies on the growth of activity in theeuro area appear to have been rather briefand limited. Reflecting the improvement in
the outlook for growth in the course of theyear, autumn forecasts for euro area realGDP growth in 1999 and 2000 were mostly

revised slightly upwards from those made
earlier in the spring of last year.According to Eurostat estimates for the euroarea, real GDP growth in 1999 as a wholestood at 2.2%, clearly down from a rate of
2.8% in the previous year (see Table 2).However, this growth rate for the year as awhole masks a pick-up in annual growth

between the first and the second half of 1999,from 1.7% to 2.7%. The pace of economic
expansion has thus recovered fairly swiftly tothe range which is assumed to be sustainable
in the medium term (2% to 2½%). The strong
dynamics in the second half of last year, asreflected in quarter-on-quarter real GDP
growth of about 1%, are expected to continue
in 2000. At the level of individual MemberStates, the growth performance in 1999 has
been somewhat divergent, but projections arefor a narrowing of growth differences in 2000(see Box 4).In 1999 the changeover to the new EuropeanSystem of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95) added to
the usual uncertainty surrounding GDPestimates. The changeover as such meant aclear improvement in terms of methodology,

comparability, frequency and timeliness ofdata, but its practical implementation wascharacterised by unforeseen delays, and data
released in the course of 1999 partly showedlarger than expected revisions. Given the
relatively short experience with compiling
data in accordance with the new ESA 95methodology, backward revisions related toSources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1)Annual rates: percentage change compared with the same period a year earlier.

2)Quarterly rates: percentage change compared with the previous quarter.

3)As a contribution to real GDP growth; in percentage points.

4)Including acquisitions less disposals of valuables.

5)Exports and imports cover goods and services and include internal cross-border trade in the euro area. Intra-euro area trade 
isnot cancelled out in import and export figures used in national accounts. Consequently, these data are not fully comparable withbalance of payments data.Table 2Composition of real GDP growth in the euro area(percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated; seasonally adjusted)Annual rates 1)Quarterly rates 2)
1997199819991998199919991999199919981999199919991999
Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q4 Q1Q2Q3Q4
Real gross domestic product2.32.82.22.01.71.82.33.10.20.60.51.00.9
of which:
Domestic demand1.73.42.83.12.82.72.73.00.80.90.40.61.1
Private consumption1.53.02.53.12.82.42.42.60.60.70.30.70.8

Government consumption0.71.21.21.01.20.91.21.30.20.8-0.10.20.3

Gross fixed capital formation2.24.44.53.83.65.14.84.60.61.60.71.70.5

Changes in inventories 3) 4)
0.30.50.10.30.20.10.00.20.2-0.10.1-0.30.4
Net exports 3)
0.6-0.5-0.5-1.1-1.0-0.9-0.20.2-0.5-0.30.10.4-0.1
Exports 5)
10.16.73.92.00.72.15.27.7-0.90.42.43.31.4
Imports 5)
8.79.15.75.64.05.06.47.50.71.42.12.11.8
29
Box 4Growth and inflation divergences in the euro areaIn 1999 there were significant differences in both growth and inflation rates among individual euro areacountries (see the table below). Although inflation and growth differentials are both expected to diminishsomewhat over the next two years according to the available forecasts of major international institutions, suchas those of the European Commission, there is no reason to expect that differences will entirely disappear in
the future, given the evidence of other large single currency areas, such as the United States.With regard to recent developments in real GDP growth, the highest growth rates in 1999 are estimated tohave been recorded in Ireland (9.4%) and Luxembourg (5.0%) as well as in Spain (3.7%), Finland and theNetherlands (both 3.5%). Growth in Portugal (2.9%) and France (2.7%) was also above the rate of area-wide
growth, albeit to a lesser extent. In Italy (1.4%) and Germany (1.5%), by contrast, growth was significantly
below that for the euro area as a whole. The divergence of growth among countries (based on the unweighted
standard deviation) actually declined in 1999. While growth slowed in most euro area countries, the slowdown
was generally strongest in those countries which had grown most rapidly in 1998. Some slowdown indomestic demand growth is expected in a number of the faster growing economies in the next few years. In theperiod ahead, further convergence in growth rates is also expected, owing to a pick-up in growth Œ from the
second half of 1999 onwards Œ in those countries which have grown more slowly.It should be borne in mind that differences in growth rates among euro area countries reflect different longer-
term trends as well as cyclical divergences (see the article in the July 1999 issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletinentitled ﬁLonger-term developments and cyclical variations in key economic indicators across euro areacountriesﬂ). In particular, higher growth rates have been experienced in some countries which are in the
process of ﬁcatching upﬂ. Growth differences may also reflect the progress made in implementing structuralreform. However, in other cases, countries may be at a different stage of the economic cycle or have respondedto a greater or lesser extent to the slowdown in the global environment in the period 1997-98. From a longer-
term perspective, the magnitude of recent divergences appears to have been similar to differences observed inthe past.Differences in inflation rates have been less marked, and the current range of inflation rates has fallen
considerably, compared with that recorded earlier in the 1990s. In Ireland, consumer prices, as measured interms of the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), rose by 2.5% in 1999; the increase in the HICP in

both Spain and Portugal was 2.2%, and in the Netherlands 2.0%. The lowest increases were recorded inAustria (0.5%), Germany and France (both 0.6%). Looking ahead, a further convergence in inflation rates canbe expected. Inflation differentials in the euro area were addressed in the October 1999 issue of the ECB

Monthly Bulletin (see the article entitled ﬁInflation differentials in a monetary unionﬂ). There are a number ofreasons why price developments may differ across countries: the weights given to individual components inReal GDP growth and HICP inflation in euro area countries(annual percentage changes)BEDEESFRIEITLUNLATPTFI
Real GDP19982.72.24.03.28.91.55.03.72.93.85.0

19992.31.53.72.79.41.45.03.52.22.93.5
HICP19980.90.61.80.72.12.01.01.80.82.21.4

19991.10.62.20.62.51.71.02.00.52.21.3
Sources: Eurostat and national estimates.

30the construction of national HICPs vary; a process of price convergence (as a result of Monetary Union andincreased price transparency); catching-up effects. Divergences in price developments can also be theconsequence of the existing cyclical divergences, which entail different degrees of demand and wage pressures.
Additionally, differences in the degree of flexibility of national goods and labour markets may amplifycontrasting national price conditions. The experience of the United States confirms the existence of inflationdifferentials within a Monetary Union and indicates that those recently prevailing among euro area countries
are also not unusually large.
As already noted, structural change, not least that linked to the introduction of the euro, may lead to a differentpattern of growth and inflation differentials across euro area countries in the future. The extent to whichdifferences across countries persist or widen is monitored closely by the ECB. However, the monetary policy
of the Eurosystem is based on area-wide developments. Insofar as circumstances would require a policy

response, this would be the responsibility of other, national policy instruments (in the same way that regionaldevelopments have hitherto been addressed by policies other than monetary policy). There has been widediscussion of the issue that labour mobility in the euro area (and within countries) is relatively low and is
unlikely to become a major means of adjustment. It is therefore important to increase labour market flexibility.Fiscal policy may also play a role in countering country-specific shocks. However, this is predicated upon theachievement of sufficient safety margins within the Stability and Growth Pact. Overall, divergences in
economic developments across euro area countries emphasise the need for structural reform of labour and
product markets, and for fiscal consolidation.the changeover may also continue to occurin the future. This requires some caution inthe interpretation of more recent GDP data.Fairly robust domestic demand, with overall
dynamics determined by net exportsWith regard to the main components of GDP,two key features essentially characterisegrowth performance in 1999. First, the robustgrowth of final domestic demand largely
explains why the slowdown in activitybetween 1998 and 1999 was eventually lesspronounced than that from 1995 to 1996.
Second, the cyclical setback at the end of1998 had been caused by a deterioration inexport opportunities to third countries, just
as the recovery of euro area growth in 1999mainly reflected improvements in externalperformance. Over the course of the year,
the contributions to real GDP growth fromdomestic demand became increasinglypositive, while those from net exports also
showed a tendency to improve (see Chart 9).With a negative contribution to GDP growthof 0.5 percentage point, net exportsdampened growth for 1999 as a whole,but, on the basis of quarter-on-quarterdevelopments, the contributions to growthturned positive in the second and third
quarters. Apart from a stabilisation and
gradual recovery of external demand, this
Chart 9Contributions to quarterly real GDPgrowth in the euro area
(quarterly percentage point contributions; seasonally adjusted)Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1)Percentage change compared with the previous quarter.
19981999
-1.0-0.50.00.5
1.01.5-1.0-0.50.00.5
1.01.5domestic demandnet exportsreal GDP 1)31
improvement also reflects, in part, a gain inprice competitiveness. While the negative
effects on domestic activity of the crises inemerging market economies were reinforced
by a high external value of the euro at theturn of the year 1998/99, the depreciation ofthe euro towards mid-1999 supported euro
area exports. As a result, the growth ofexports of goods and services recoveredstrongly and outpaced the growth of imports
in the second and third quarters of last year.Domestic demand remained fairly robustduring 1999, expanding at an annual rate ofaround 3% in each quarter. Fairly sustained
growth in private consumption largely
accounted for strong domestic demandgrowth. Consumer confidence, which hadreached an all-time high at the beginning of
1999, remained well above its long-termaverage throughout the year. This high levelof confidence and the associated robustness
of consumption growth resulted fromcontinuously high employment growth and apick-up in real wage growth in an environment
of low real interest rates and price stability.In addition, in the context of a low interestrate environment, relatively buoyant stock
and housing markets may have supportedhousehold consumption and also beenconducive to the growth in credit.
Government consumption expanded onlymodestly in 1999. This reflects ongoing needsin most Member States to further consolidate
public finances and the desire to reduce therelative size of the government sector in theeconomy.As regards the investment components ofGDP, capital accumulation in 1999 as a whole
appears to have been largely unaffected bythe slowdown in total demand, i.e. domesticdemand plus exports. Gross fixed capital
formation in 1999 increased by 4.5% as a
whole, and thus at around the same pace asin 1998. A number of factors have contributed
to this development. The fact that the
negative demand effects had been rathershort-lived, as reflected in the upturn in
industrial confidence after the first quarter of1999, appears to have limited the adverseeffects on business investment. In particular,capacity utilisation in the manufacturingsector, an indicator of demand pressurerelative to supply capacity, did not fall below
its long-term average during 1999 and, hence,
did not signal excessive spare capacity. Animportant incentive to maintain investment
efforts, not only in the business field but alsowith regard to housing investment, is likelyto have been the low levels of real interest

rates that prevailed. As regards the othercomponent of investment, inventory changes
made a small positive contribution to GDP
growth in 1999. However, given the statisticaluncertainties associated with the compilationof inventory changes in national accounts,

the interpretation of the contribution frominventories faces clear limits. Due tothese uncertainties, it is also not possible to

assess in detail the more specific effects on
inventory developments in 1999, such asthose purportedly related to the year 2000
phenomenon.Cyclical pattern most visible in theindustrial sectorAt the sectoral level, both the slowdown andthe subsequent resumption of overall activity
growth were largely concentrated in the
industrial sector, while output developmentsin the services sectors appear to have beenmore stable. This reflects the relatively high
importance of external demand for output inthe manufacturing sector and of domesticdemand for services. The different sectoral
growth patterns were mirrored in thedifferent developments of industrial and
consumer confidence (see Chart 10). On the
one hand, the decrease in consumerconfidence from the peak reached at thebeginning of 1999 was only small and short-

lived, and the indicator remained well aboveits long-term average level. Industrial
confidence, on the other hand, saw a more
protracted downturn, which had started inearly 1998, and fell below its long-termaverage in the first half of 1999. Both
confidence indicators picked up over thefurther course of the year and, by the end of
321999, were almost back to their previouspeak levels.Industrial production continued to decline up
to the beginning of 1999, before witnessing a
turnaround to positive rates of growth. In
the first quarter production was already
higher, on average, than in the final quarter
of 1998. While production growth started to
accelerate after the summer months, the pace
of expansion at the end of the year wassomewhat slower than that observed during
previous periods of recovery. However,
production data for the fourth quarter of1999 are likely to be revised upwards in linewith additional information which became
available after the release of production data
for December 1999. Bearing this in mind, in1999 as a whole industrial production increased
by less than 2% (see Table 3). Growth wasstrongest in the durable 
consumer goodsindustries, reaching 2.3% for the year as a
whole. Output in these industries is likely tohave benefited from a number of factors, overand above the continued strength of
consumer demand in general. In particular,
the liberalisation of the telecommunicationsmarkets and advances in internet technology
have boosted production of the equipmentconcerned. In the capital goods industries theturnaround in production growth occurred

somewhat later than in other industries, with
growth in 1999 as a whole reaching 1.5%.Finally, in the intermediate goods industries,
the recovery began slightly earlier than inother parts of the manufacturing sector, butit evolved only gradually, and production
growth did not exceed 1.5% in 1999.Chart 10Confidence indicators in the euro area(percentage balances; monthly data; mean-adjusted)Source: European Commission Business and Consumer Surveys.Note: Data shown are calculated as deviations from the average
over the period since January 1985.19981999
-6-3036
912-6-3036
912consumer confidenceindustrial confidenceTable 3Industrial production in the euro area(percentage changes)Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1)Annual rates: percentage change compared with the same period a year earlier by using data adjusted for variations in the
number of working days.2)Quarterly rates: percentage change compared with the previous quarter by using seasonally and working day adjusted data.
Annual rates 1)Quarterly rates 2)
1997199819991998199919991999199919981999199919991999
Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q4 Q1Q2Q3Q4
Total industry excl. construct.4.44.11.61.60.50.42.13.3-0.20.20.51.41.1
Manufacturing5.04.61.61.40.20.32.13.6-0.80.50.61.80.8
by main industrial groupings:
Intermediate goods5.43.71.50.3-0.10.22.73.6-0.20.40.71.51.0

Capital goods5.06.81.54.31.1-0.31.33.60.0-0.20.31.51.3

Consumer goods2.73.11.71.31.11.22.02.5-0.40.60.71.20.0
Durable consumer goods2.86.42.34.61.92.82.32.40.3-0.31.41.60.1

Non-durable consumer goods2.61.51.5-0.30.80.12.32.60.20.40.31.00.4
33
Overall, in 1999 the negative impact ofdevelopments in the external environmenton euro area activity was limited and short-lived. The upturn in overall activity in the
course of the year was largely the result of
increasing export growth and, in terms ofsectoral developments, mainly reflected the
recovery of industrial production. Togetherwith the fairly sustained growth of domesticdemand and of service sector output, this
may be seen as forming the basis for abroadly based expansion in 2000.Employment growth sustained in 1999According to national data, in 1999employment in the euro area is estimated tohave increased at broadly the same rate as in
1998, i.e. at 1.4%. While this suggests that
the slowdown in economic activity aroundthe turn of the year 1998/99 did not, on

average, affect overall employment growth,its impact is evident from the quarterlyChart 11Total employment in the euro area ¹)(quarterly data; seasonally adjusted)Sources: National data (excluding Belgium and Ireland) and ECB calculations.1)The national data taken into account in the calculation of the euro area indicator refer, wherever possible, to total employm
ent(employees and non-employees) in all sectors of activity excluding the armed forces. In the Netherlands they refer only to
employees.19921993199419951996199719981999
-3.0-2.0-1.00.0
1.0
2.099100101
102
103
104percentage change compared with the same period a year earlier (left-hand scale)percentage change compared with the preceding period (left-hand scale)total employment level; index: 1995 = 100 (right-hand scale)growth pattern. This shows a slightdeceleration in the quarter-on-quartergrowth rate in the first half of 1999 by
contrast with the gradual acceleration
recorded in the previous year (seeChart 11).This pattern of total employment growthlargely reflects developments in the industrial
sector, where growth remained negative in
the first two quarters of 1999. The morepronounced pattern in industry was causedby the fact that the industrial sector is far
more sensitive to external developments than
other sectors of the economy. In 1999 as awhole employment in industry declined
slightly. Consequently, it can be concludedthat the very limited impact of the slowdownin economic activity on total employment
growth in 1999 must have resulted from thesustained strength of employment growth inthe other sectors of the economy, particularly
in the services sector. Employmentdevelopments in this sector, which is more
34labour-intensive than the industrial sector,have benefited from the continued growth ofdomestic demand.Other factors which also explain employmentdevelopments in the euro area in 1999 are,as mentioned in Section 3 above, favourable
labour cost developments resulting from thecontinuation of moderate wage growth aswell as cuts in non-wage labour costs. In
addition, government policies aimed atreducing structural rigidities in the labourmarket as well as employment creation
programmes contributed to employmentgrowth in 1999.Unemployment rate continued to declinegraduallyThe standardised rate of unemploymentcontinued to decrease in the course of 1999,
broadly in line with the trend observed in1998 (see Chart 12). At the end of the yearthe rate of unemployment stood at 9.6%,
i.e. 0.9 percentage point lower than inDecember 1998. On average, the number ofunemployed fell by around 1 million in 1999
(compared with a fall of 785,000 in 1998) toreach 12.9 million, the lowest level recorded
since 1992. As was also the case in 1998, the

growth of the labour force which accompaniedthe sustained pace of net job creation in 1999appears to have limited somewhat the effect
of employment growth on the decline inunemployment (see Table 4). The labourforce is estimated to have increased at a

similar rate of growth to that registered overthe previous three years, i.e. at 0.6%, whichis 0.4 percentage point higher than the
average rate of growth recorded earlier inthe 1990s. This stronger growth may in partChart 12Unemployment in the euro area(monthly data)Source: Eurostat.1993199419951996199719981999
-1.5-1.0-0.50.0
0.51.01.52.02.58.59.09.510.010.511.011.512.012.5
13.0% of the labour force (right-hand scale)annual change in millions (left-hand scale)Table 4Labour market developments in the euro area(annual percentage changes and percentages)1997199819991997199719981998199819981999199919991999
Q3Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Labour force0.70.6.0.70.80.70.60.60.60.60.50.5.
Employment0.61.4.0.60.91.21.31.51.61.71.51.4.
Total industry-1.30.2.-1.2-0.50.10.10.30.40.10.00.0.
Unemployment0.6-5.3-7.80.7-0.5-2.8-4.8-6.2-7.5-7.7-7.7-7.9-8.0
Rates ofunemployment 1)
Total11.510.910.011.611.411.210.910.810.610.310.110.09.7
Under 25 years23.221.219.123.122.621.821.421.120.720.019.318.918.3

25 years and over9.99.48.89.99.99.79.59.39.19.08.98.78.6
Sources: Eurostat, national data and ECB calculations.1)Percentage of the labour force according to ILO recommendations.
35
be the result of an improvement in theemployment situation in recent years, whichmay have incited more people to enter orreturn to the labour market.Looking at developments in the course of1999, the decline in the unemployment rate

slowed somewhat during the summer months.This reflected the lagged negative effect ofthe temporary slowdown in economic activity
at the turn of the year 1998/99. However,from September onwards the rate ofunemployment resumed its decline in reaction

to a strengthening of economic activity.
The breakdown by age shows that the
unemployment rate declined for both youngpeople and those above 25 years of age.However, the decline was stronger for the
former (from 20.7% to 18.3% between theend of 1998 and the end of 1999) than forthe latter (from 9.1% to 8.6% over the same

period). Finally, at the individual country level,dispersion in the rates of unemploymentdeclined during the year, owing to cyclical

factors and to the protracted effectsof structural labour market reformsimplemented in some countries.
365Fiscal developments
Deficits continue to decline mainly for
cyclical reasons and owing to lower debt
service costsBudgetary positions continued to improvemodestly in 1999. The outlook for a furtherimprovement in budgetary balances haddeteriorated in the early part of 1999 on
account of a slowdown in economic growth.However, thereafter and especially in thesecond half of the year economic conditions
improved; this, together with relatively low
interest rates, exerted a beneficial effect onpublic finances. On balance, an improvementin budgetary positions was seen across the
euro area, with the average generalgovernment deficit-to-GDP ratio falling from2% in 1998 to 1¼% in 1999 (see Table 5).

This reduction in the deficit ratio wasthe result of slightly lower governmentexpenditure relative to GDP and a slight

increase in the government revenue-to-GDP
ratio. A smaller decline in the deficit ratiohad been expected earlier in the year, but

the results turned out to be more favourablethan anticipated owing to higher thanGeneral government gross debt1996199719981999
Euro area75.274.673.072.2
Belgium128.3123.0117.4114.4

Germany59.860.960.761.1

Spain68.066.764.963.5

France57.159.059.358.6

Ireland74.165.355.652.4

Italy122.1119.8116.3114.9

Luxembourg6.26.06.46.2

Netherlands75.370.367.063.8

Austria68.363.963.564.9

Portugal63.660.356.556.8

Finland57.154.149.047.1
Sources: Eurostat and ECB for euro area aggregates.Note: Data are based on the ESA 95.General government surplus (+) or deficit (-)1996199719981999
Euro area-4.3-2.6-2.0-1.2
Belgium-3.7-2.0-1.0-0.9

Germany-3.4-2.6-1.7-1.2

Spain-5.0-3.2-2.6-1.1

France-4.2-3.0-2.7-1.8

Ireland-0.60.82.12.0

Italy-7.1-2.7-2.8-1.9

Luxembourg2.73.63.22.4

Netherlands-1.8-1.2-0.80.5

Austria-3.8-1.9-2.5-2.0

Portugal-3.8-2.6-2.1-2.0

Finland-3.2-1.51.32.3
Table 5Fiscal positions in the euro area(as a percentage of GDP)37
expected government revenue, which waspartly due to improved economic conditions.In addition, revised budgetary outcomesfor 1998 resulted in a better than
expected starting position for 1999. Generalgovernment gross debt, in relation to GDPfor the euro area, declined slightly in 1999.Given that fiscal policies are the responsibilityof each Member State, assessing only euro
area figures would mean neglecting importantdifferences in the public finances of individualcountries. Four countries can be seen to have
recorded budget surpluses in 1999 (Ireland,Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Finland).With the exception of the Netherlands, these
countries also comfortably comply with thereference value for government debt of60% of GDP. The Netherlands and Finland
improved their fiscal balances and managed
to lower their debt ratios further in 1999.Luxembourg reported very low government
debt at 6.2% of GDP. Two countries Œ Italyand Belgium Œ recorded debt ratios above110% of GDP, but these were declining

further. Italy showed a deficit ratio improvingfrom 2.8% in 1998 to 1.9% in 1999, while thedeficit ratio in Belgium remained virtually
constant at 1%. All the remaining countries
had deficit ratios of up to 2% in 1999 and
debt ratios somewhat below (France and
Portugal) or slightly above the 60% of GDP
level (Germany, Spain, the Netherlands andAustria). Budget balance ratios remained
broadly stable in Belgium, Ireland and Portugal
between 1998 and 1999, whereas moresignificant progress was made in the remaining
countries with the exception of Luxembourg,where the budget surplus-to-GDP ratio
declined. Three countries showed rising debt
ratios (Germany, Austria and Portugal).However, an assessment of governments™underlying budgetary positions must take dueaccount of both cyclical developments andother factors outside the direct control of

governments. In this context, it appears thatpublic finances in the euro area continue tobe largely driven by economic conditions and
declining debt service costs. European
Commission estimates suggest only a marginalimprovement in the cyclically adjustedprimary balance-to-GDP ratio (i.e. the budget
balance excluding government debt interestpayments and corrected for cyclical
influences) for the euro area as a whole in1999. Active consolidation measures do not
thus appear to have played an active role in
improving the underlying budgetary positionsin 1999. This was already evident in 1998,despite the opportunity which strong growth
had provided for accelerating the reductionof structural imbalances in many MemberStates.While declining debt service costs had astrong impact on overall budgetary positions,
the average primary surplus in relation toGDP saw only a slight improvement in 1998and 1999. It is worth mentioning, in particular,
that primary surplus-to-GDP ratios declinedin Belgium and Italy in 1999, countries wherehigh government debt ratios warrant

relatively ambitious budgetary targets in
order to bring about a rapid reduction in thelevel of debt. However, the aforementioned
evidence suggests that Member States withthe highest debt ratios in the euro area stillneed to make significant further progress in
this regard.Furthermore, with regard to the evolution ofgovernment debt, the role played by ﬁdeficit-
debt adjustmentsﬂ in changing debt ratios inthe euro area was not insignificant, as was

already the case in previous years. Suchadjustments leave the deficit ratio unaffected,but have an impact on government debt
levels. They reduce public debt, for example
in the case of privatisation, a course of actionwhich was pursued by most euro area

governments in 1999 and earlier. In a fewother instances, for example, capital injectionsto public enterprises and adjustments in the
value of foreign currency debt have keptpublic debt at levels above those which mighthave been expected from the fiscal deficit.
38Member States™ consolidation strategiesMost Member States have made it clearduring recent discussions on the orientation
of their fiscal policies that they intend tofurther consolidate public finances in orderto achieve budgetary positions consistent

with the requirements of the Stability andGrowth Pact. Accordingly, deficit ratios inthe euro area are forecast to continue to
decline in 2000, albeit only slowly. Moreover,current budgetary plans suggest that furtherreductions in government deficits can again

be largely explained by favourable economicconditions and by a continued lowering of
interest payments in relation to GDP.
At the same time, the key objectives of fiscalpolicy-makers seem to be shifting towards a
strategy of reducing budgetary imbalanceswhile also modifying the level and structureof government revenue and expenditure. A
number of governments are planning to takeadvantage of the favourable economic
outlook in order to introduce tax reforms
aimed at promoting growth and employment,while at the same time controllingexpenditure in order to create room for

further deficit cuts. As a result, the reductionin deficit ratios in 2000 is forecast to befuelled by lower government expenditure-to-
GDP ratios in almost all Member States,
mainly on account of savings in thegovernment sector wage bill and in household
transfer payments. At the same time,
government revenue in relation to GDP ispredicted to fall in 2000 as a result of planned
or already implemented reforms affectingtaxes and social security contributions. Taxreform should not jeopardise budgetary
targets or result in pro-cyclical impulses.By the end of 1999 and in early 2000Member States submitted updated stability
programmes covering the period up to2002/2003 to the European Commission in
accordance with the Stability and GrowthPact. According to the Stability and Growth
Pact, Member States are committed to
adhering to the ﬁmedium-term objective ofbudgetary positions close to balance orin surplusﬂ. This objective is consideredappropriate ﬁto allow Member States to deal
with normal cyclical fluctuations while keepingthe government deficit within the 3% of GDP
reference valueﬂ. When setting medium-termobjectives, other factors should also be takeninto account. These include possible future
tax shortfalls and expenditure overruns, theneed to ensure a rapid decline in debt ratiosin those countries in which they stand
above 60% and the need to cope withexpenditure related to the ageing of the
population in the future.According to the updated stability
programmes, prospects for economic growth
in 2000 and in the next few years are at least
as favourable as in the original programmes.Against this background, governments aim to
further consolidate general governmentbudgetary positions in the medium term. The
envisaged progress in bringing down
government deficit and debt ratios varies
from one country to another, as do the fiscalpositions targeted towards the end of the
planning horizon. A number of governmentsare now planning to achieve somewhat moreambitious fiscal targets than those in their
original programmes. Most countries areexpected to achieve deficits of below 0.5% orfiscal surpluses and debt levels below 60% of
GDP by 2002/2003. At the same time, mostgovernments are planning to reduce taxes.
Belgium and Italy will still report public debt
levels close to 100% of GDP.It should be noted that during the planninghorizon any additional government revenues
resulting from higher than expected growth(the growth dividend) should normally be
devoted to faster progress in fiscal
consolidation, rather than to lowering thetax pressure. This is particularly appropriate
for countries in which the deficit ratio is notdistant enough from the limit of 3% of GDP,for those in which public debt is still high and

for those in which the economy is subject tothe risk of overheating.39
6The global macroeconomic environment, exchange rates and
the balance of paymentsA significant improvement in the globalmacroeconomic environmentGlobal economic and financial conditions haveimproved markedly since the slowdown in
1998, as most of the crisis-hit economiesin Asia began to recover in the course of
1999 and the world economy appears to beon a cyclical upturn. Adjustment in some ofthe worst hit countries has been far more
favourable than expected. Financial marketconfidence has returned in most of theemerging Asian economies, allowing monetary
conditions to ease and setting the stage foreconomic recovery. At the same time,stronger than expected economic growth in

some industrialised countries, particularly inthe United States, led to substantially
more positive assessments of the global
outlook.The improved economic outlook in thecourse of 1999 was partly counterbalancedby a substantial rise in oil prices from thevery low levels seen in late 1998 and early
1999, reversing one of the factors that hadcontributed to low inflation in 1998. Crude
oil prices rose from USD 11.5 per barrel in

the first quarter of 1999 to USD 26 inDecember 1999. These price rises were thecombined result of a decision of the
Organization of the Petroleum ExportingCountries (OPEC) to curtail oil supplies andstronger demand, especially from Asia. The

impact of this strong increase in oil prices onglobal inflation, however, was partlydampened by non-oil commodity prices
measured in US dollars, which on aggregateremained largely constant over the year andsaw only a moderate upswing in the last two
months of 1999. The oil price increasecontinued in early 2000 and the price hadreached USD 31.9 per barrel at the time this
Report was finalised.In the United States strong output growthand productivity, declining unemployment andsubdued inflationary pressures continued tocharacterise economic developments in 1999.Real GDP growth was vigorous throughoutthe year, ranging from a low seasonally
adjusted quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.5% in
the second quarter of 1999 to a high of 1.7%in the fourth quarter. As a result, theeconomy recorded an overall growth rate of
around 4% in 1999, for the third consecutive
year. The strength of domestic demand,particularly private consumer expenditure and
business fixed investment, continued to drivethe expansion, while the contribution of netexports to GDP growth remained strongly
negative. US exports suffered in the first halfof the year, but improved markedly in thesecond half in response to the rapid recovery
of global economic growth. Nevertheless,imports grew faster than exports throughout1999, leading to a further widening of the
US trade deficit. The latter, in conjunction
with the continuing deterioration in theUS investment income balance, resulted in
the current account deficit reaching anestimated 3.6% of GDP in 1999. As a result
of several years of strong growth, the

unemployment rate declined further to 4.1%,a level not seen since the late 1960s. Despitethe tight labour markets, inflationary

pressures remained subdued as a result oflarge gains in labour productivity andincreased competition in product markets.
Consumer price inflation rose to 2.2% in1999, up from 1.6% in 1998, while underlyinginflation Œ which excludes the volatile
components of food and energy Œ was 2.1%on average compared with 2.3% in 1998. Inorder to counteract increasing inflationary

risks, indicated by increasingly tight labourmarket conditions and overall excess demand,from the summer onwards the Federal
Reserve tightened monetary policy bygradually raising its target for the federalfunds rate from 4.75% to 5.5% at the end of

1999, thereby reversing the rate cuts ofautumn 1998.In Japan economic conditions improved inthe first half of 1999, but then deteriorated

40again in the second, indicating that noself-sustained recovery was yet in place. As a
result of a fiscal stimulus amounting to around
10% of GDP in 1998, public investment as
well as private consumption and residentialinvestment registered positive growth in the
first half of 1999, while business fixed

investment continued to contract following atrend which started in 1998. However, bythe third quarter of 1999, as the fiscal impulse
faded away, a sharp downward correction ofpublic investment growth took place,accompanied by negative growth in
consumption and private investment. Netexports made a somewhat negativecontribution to GDP growth, but exports
recorded an improvement throughout theyear, despite the real appreciation of theJapanese yen of around 25%. In the meantime,

weak economic activity was reflected in apersistent decline in prices, as measured byboth the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and
the Wholesale Price Index (WPI), which in1999 declined on average by around 0.2%
and 3.6% respectively, although both
stabilised in the last few months of 1999. In
1999 monetary policy remained supportive,with the Bank of Japan pushing its operational
target (the uncollateralised overnight callrate) towards nil. By the end of the year,the Japanese Government had approved
a supplementary fiscal package worthapproximately JPY 18 trillion (3.6% of GDP),as the recovery of private consumption
remained sluggish and business investmentwas still contracting.The other Asian economies achieved aremarkable and stronger than expected
rebound in 1999 from the severe economic
and financial crisis that had affected the region
the year before. The economies of South
Korea, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand all
achieved strong real rates of growth in 1999,with growth initially being driven by net
exports and subsequently by strong

recoveries in domestic demand. In theseeconomies, financial markets developedincreasingly favourably over the course of
1999. In Hong Kong (SAR) and Indonesia,however, growth barely turned positive in
1999. China continued to weather the effectsof the Asian crisis in 1999. While undergoingsignificant structural reforms, real growthdeclined only slightly to 7.2%.Over the course of 1999 transitioneconomies were confronted with the adverse
impact of the Russian crisis on investorconfidence. However, after a significantslowdown in the first quarter of 1999, the
broad economic outlook rapidly improved inthe Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland. InRussia the economy continued to be affected
by political uncertainty and weak economicfundamentals, although there were somepositive signals in the real sector, including a
rebound in industrial production. As a result
of these developments, real GDP growth is
estimated to have increased by around 3%,
which was significantly higher than initiallyprojected, following a contraction of almost5% in 1998. In other transition economies,

and particularly in the Baltic states, there wasa sharp deceleration of growth, as the Russiancrisis had a stronger than anticipated impact.
The political and economic situation inRomania remained a cause for concern, asthe losses in GDP since 1997 totalled
approximately 16%.In Latin America by the end of 1999 theeconomic outlook had improved in terms ofgrowth prospects and financial stability. Theyear started inauspiciously, with most
countries in the region in recession in the
aftermath of the Russian crisis of 1998. TheBrazilian currency came under intense
pressure and was left to float in January 1999.Ultimately, the recession in Brazil was lesssevere than had been feared and the
contagion effects of the Brazilian crisis werelimited. By the end of the year, the region asa whole was pulling out of recession, although
the economic recovery remained fragile in anumber of countries as a result of slowprogress in fiscal consolidation and structural
reforms.41
Chart 13Main developments in major industrialised economies199419951996199719981999
-4-3-2
-10123
456
78-4
-3-2
-10123
456
78euro areaUnited StatesJapanOutput growth 1)(annual percentage changes; quarterly data)199419951996199719981999
-2-1012345-2
-1012345euro areaUnited StatesJapanInflation rates 2)(annual percentage changes; monthly data)199419951996199719981999
012345678012345678euro areaUnited StatesJapanShort-term interest rates 3)(monthly averages; in percentages)199419951996199719981999
0.91.01.11.21.31.41.51.61.78090100
110120130140150USD/EUR (left-hand scale)JPY/USD (right-hand scale)Exchange rates 4)(monthly averages)Sources: National data, BIS, Eurostat and ECB calculations.1)Eurostat data are used for the euro area; for the United States and Japan national data are used.

2)Data for the euro area up to 1995 are estimates for the HICP based on national CPI data; after 1995 data are HICP.

3)Euro area data are ECB calculations and are averages of national three-month interbank rates, from 1999 onwards three-month
EURIBOR rates are used.4)Up to 1999 the USD/EUR line shows USD/ECU data.

42The euro weakened during 1999
The exchange rate of the euro declinedagainst the currencies of most trading
partners of the euro area in 1999, inparticular against the major currencies suchas the US dollar, the Japanese yen and the
pound sterling. In nominal effective terms,weighted against the currencies of the euroarea™s major trading partners, the euro
weakened by around 8% from the first to thefourth quarter of 1999, and the average levelof the nominal effective exchange rate index
in 1999 was around 6% below the level in1998 (see Chart 14). In early 2000 the euro™sdepreciation continued and the average level
of the nominal effective exchange rate indexin January and February 2000 was 2.6% belowthat in the fourth quarter of 1999 and 10.3%
below that in the first quarter of 1999.Throughout the first half of the year, theeuro depreciated by around 12% against theUS dollar. The most important factors that
contributed to the strength of the dollar were
the changes in the respective cyclical outlooksfor the United States and the euro area andthe better than expected performance of theUS economy in the aftermath of the globalfinancial crisis in the second half of 1998.There was a turnaround in mid-July, whenpositive readings of euro area economic
indicators triggered a rebound of the euro,which was further fuelled by expectationsof a slowdown in the US economy and

risks of larger corrections on US stockmarkets. However, subsequent data releases
diminished these fears, with data showing
continuous strong growth and subduedinflationary pressures in the US economy.At end-1999 the euro was quoted at
USD 1.005. The pattern of relative economicperformance and related exchange ratemovements continued into early 2000, when
the euro continued to depreciate againstthe US dollar. On 7 March 2000 the euro
was quoted at USD 0.959.Among the major currencies the Japanese
yen experienced the most significant
appreciation in 1999, albeit amid highvolatility. From the beginning to the end of1999, the Japanese yen rose by 30% against
the euro and by 11% against the US dollar.
This strengthening occurred mainly againstthe background of significant current account
surpluses and in parallel with a turnaround of
the economy, which started to record slightly
more positive growth after the relatively deep
recession of 1998. In line with thisimprovement in growth, long-term nominal
interest rates in Japan recovered from the
troughs of below 1% which they had reachedin the second half of 1998 to around 1.8% at
the end of the year. At end-1999 the euro

was quoted at JPY 102.73. The Japanese yencontinued to be relatively volatile in early2000 and displayed no strong overall trend.
On 7 March 2000 the euro was quoted atJPY 103.00.Reduced current account surplusThe current account surplus of the euro area
declined slightly to approximately 0.75% ofGDP in 1999 (43.2 billion), from around 1%of GDP in 1998 (ECU 60.3 billion). Thereason for this decline was a decrease in theChart 14Nominal effective exchange rate 1)
(monthly averages; index: 1999 Q1 = 100)
Source: ECB.1)Data are ECB calculations (see Box 5 in the October 1999
issue of the Monthly Bulletin). An upward movement of the
index represents an appreciation of the euro. The horizontal
line shows the average over the period shown (January 1994
to February 2000).199419951996199719981999
88909294
96
9810010210410610811011288909294
96
98
100
102
104
10610811011243
surplus on trade in goods which, in turn, wasmainly the result of a strong increase in
import values in the course of the year,
attributable to higher import prices,
particularly energy (see Box 5), along with alow level of export values in the first half of
1999 and, to a lesser extent, the deterioration
in the services trade balance. By contrast,lower deficits were recorded for the currenttransfers and income accounts in 1999.Over 1999 as a whole, the goods tradesurplus of the euro area declined to
99.9 billion from ECU 118.8 billion in 1998.
In the second half of last year, however,export values began to show stronger

underlying growth, reflecting both risingforeign demand and improvements in pricecompetitiveness. Despite the increase in
exports during the course of the year, import
values continued to grow faster than exports,which seems to be related to higher import
prices, partly resulting from higher oil pricesand the weakening of the euro, along withsigns of increased activity in the euro area
during the last six months of 1999.The services balance also deteriorated in
1999, compared with 1998, reaching a deficitof 6.6 billion by the end of last year. Higherpayments, combined with virtually zero
growth in receipts, underlay the rise in thedeficit in services. By contrast, the deficits onthe current transfers and income accounts

fell in 1999, declining by 3.0 billion and4.6 billion respectively. The improvementin the income account was mostly a result of
lower investment income payments in 1999,compared with the very high levels reachedin 1998.Euro area residents increased foreign direct
investment, while portfolio investmentoutflows declinedIn 1999 direct and portfolio investment net
outflows amounted to 168.5 billion,i.e. lower than the ECU 187.9 billion in the

previous year. The major determinant ofthe outflows from the euro area were net
direct investment outflows. The latter
increased from ECU 102.6 billion in 1998to 147.2 billion in 1999; in particular,euro area residents invested more abroad
(212.5 billion in 1999, compared withECU 183 billion in 1998). At the same timeforeign direct investment in the euro area
remained subdued (65.2 billion, compared
with ECU 80.4 billion in 1998).The increase in net direct investmentoutflows contrasted with a 64.0 billiondecline in net portfolio investment outflows
to 21.3 billion in 1999, compared with 1998.This was related to the swing in debtinstruments from net outflows in 1998
(ECU 84.8 billion) to net inflows in 1999(34.8 billion). Both lower investment onthe part of euro area residents abroad and
stronger demand on the part of foreigninvestors for euro area debt securities, inparticular money market instruments,
contributed to the turnaround. On theother hand, net equity outflows increased to
56.1 billion (from ECU 0.4 billion in 1998),
mainly as a result of higher investment in
foreign equities on the part of euro arearesidents (which rose to 150.0 billion, from
ECU 98.7 billion in 1998).
44Box 5The decline in the surplus of trade in goods of the euro area in 1999Some of the decline in the surplus of trade in goods in 1999 is explained by the low level of export values duringthe first half of the year, primarily owing to the ﬁcarry-overﬂ effects of weak foreign demand in 1998. Althoughexport values recovered later in 1999, in line with stronger growth in foreign demand, import values grew even
more rapidly throughout the year, mainly as a result of rising import prices and of higher activity in the euro area.The recovery in foreign demand, defined as a weighted average of the import volumes of the euro area™s mainexport markets, is shown in the chart below.1 The strong negative growth rates for demand in Japan and the
rest of Asia, together with a deceleration in UK import growth, partly explain the decline in export values in1998 and early 1999. Similarly, the rebound in demand in Asia, as well as continued robust import growth inthe United States, corresponds with the recovery in exports in 1999. Although the United Kingdom is the

largest market, accounting for around 19.3% of the exports of the euro area, Asia including Japan accounts for18.3%, followed by the United States (14%) and the transition economies of eastern Europe (13.5%).
On the imports side, a persistently high level of import volumes Œ combined with the sharp rise in import
prices since the beginning of 1999 and largely accounted for by the strong rise in oil prices as well as thedecline of the euro Œ contributed significantly to the growth in import values in 1999. However, part of the rise
in import values can also be attributed to imports of manufactured goods which grew by 7% in 1999.2 Imports
of machinery and vehicles grew particularly rapidly, increasing by around 11% in 1999, which is consistent
with a higher level of activity in the euro area in the second half of 1999. In terms of supplier countries,

imports of goods from China and Hungary registered the strongest growth in value terms in 1999, recordingannual increases of around 16% and 19% respectively.1Total foreign demand is approximated by a weighted average of the import volumes of the euro area
™s main export markets hj hmj (i.e. the weights of the markets multiplied by their respective import volume growth rates). The respective weights are
:United States 14.0%, Japan 3.6%, United Kingdom 19.3%, Switzerland 6.4%, Other developed countries 14.9%, non-Japan
Asia 14.7%, Transition economies 13.5%, Latin America 4.4%, Rest of the world 9.2%.2Data for imports by commodity or country compare the period from January to November 1999 with the corresponding period
in 1998 (source: Eurostat). These data are based on Eurostat trade statistics and are not fully comparable with ECB b.o.p. data.Import volumes of major euro area export markets
(annual percentage changes)-15
-10
-15
-10
-505101520Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
United StatesUnited KingdomJapanAsiatotal19971997199719971998199819981998
1999199919991999
-50510152045
Chapter IICentral bank operationsECB Annual Report Ł 1999
481Monetary policy implementation
1.1Liquidity management
The monetary policy operational frameworkof the Eurosystem contains a wide set ofinstruments which were chosen in view
of the need to respect the principles ofmarket orientation, operational efficiency
(understood as the capacity to achieve

efficiently the objectives of the Eurosystem),
equal treatment, simplicity, transparency andcost-efficiency. In addition, while the relevant
decisions are taken by the governing bodiesof the ECB, they are implemented in a
decentralised manner by the 11 NCBs of the
Eurosystem. The variety of instrumentsavailable is such that the governing bodies of
the ECB are able to use them in the
combination deemed most appropriate to thecircumstances. Overall, in the first year ofimplementation of the single monetary policy,
the operational framework of the Eurosystemworked smoothly.One element of the Eurosystem™s operationalframework is the minimum reserve system,which requires credit institutions to hold cash
balances with the Eurosystem™s NCBs in anamount equal to 2% of their reserve base,i.e. a range of short-term liabilities. The fact
that such a requirement must only be fulfilled,on average, during one-month ﬁmaintenanceperiodsﬂ has a significant smoothing effect on
the demand for reserves by credit institutionsand thereby also on the behaviour ofshort- term money market interest rates. This
has been a factor enabling the Eurosystem toconduct monetary policy efficiently resortingonly to a limited number of the instruments
available during the first year ofimplementation of the single monetary policy.In its liquidity management the ECB focuses
on the interbank market for reserves, thelatter being understood as the current

account deposits that credit institutions inthe euro area hold with the NCBs of theEurosystem. The supply of such reserves is
determined by the net effect of the liquidityprovided through monetary policy operationsand the liquidity absorbed or injected byﬁautonomous factorsﬂ (i.e. items of the

Eurosystem™s balance sheet, the amount ofwhich does not depend on the central bank™smonetary policy operations, such as
banknotes in circulation, government depositsand net foreign assets). The demand forreserves is determined by credit institutions™
need to fulfil reserve requirements and afurther limited demand for ﬁexcessﬂ reserves.
The market price of reserves is the

short-term interbank rate, whereby theovernight maturity plays a dominant role in
terms of volume and is often a point of

reference, since it is the shortest relevantmaturity and, therefore, the initial point ofthe yield curve. The widely used reference
rate for overnight euro deposits, the EONIA(euro overnight index average) rate, is aneffective overnight rate computed as a
weighted average of the unsecuredovernight lending transactions of a panel of57 contributing banks in the interbank market.The liquidity management of the creditinstitutions in the euro area is driven by their
aim to minimise the cost of holding the requiredreserves over the maintenance period. The costincurred by credit institutions in holding
reserves on a given day can be measured by thedifference between the interbank overnight rateand the interest rate paid on the required
reserves (the main refinancing operations
(MRO) rate) on that day. Therefore, creditinstitutions will attempt to build up reserve
surpluses whenever this difference is low,compared with future expected differenceswithin the same maintenance period, and vice
versa. This behaviour tends to stabilise marketrates as, in order for the market to clear,overnight rates will tend to be aligned with
future expected overnight rates within themaintenance period. Interbank rates willconsequently be determined by past, current,
and expected future liquidity conditions in themaintenance period. In addition, the interbankovernight rate is influenced by market
expectations of future changes in the MROrate by the ECB. Therefore, the ECB influences
499
the interbank overnight rate not only throughits actual decisions, but also through the
expectations it generates with regard to itsinterest rate and its allotment policy in open

market operations.The quantity of reserves available to creditinstitutions is not only affected by monetarypolicy operations, but also by fluctuations inother items of the Eurosystem™s balance
sheet, namely the autonomous factors. Theeffects of autonomous factors on liquidityare sometimes considerable: day-to-day
changes of autonomous factors in the orderof 10 billion are relatively frequent. In the
case of the Eurosystem, the most volatile
autonomous factor is government depositswith the NCBs. The volatility of the dailychanges in government deposits (measured
by its standard deviation) amounted to more
than 5 billion, compared with around1 billion for banknotes. In 1999 the totalreserve requirements of credit institutions inthe euro area varied between 98.2 billion(during the first maintenance period) and
105 billion (during the maintenance periodending on 23 December). The reserveholdings of banks fluctuated between
63.0 billion and 126.4 billion in the courseof the year without producing significantstress in the prevailing market rates,
indicating that the liquidity buffers provided
by the system were never exhausted.1.2The main refinancing operations
The MROs are the most important openmarket operations conducted by the
Eurosystem, playing a pivotal role in steering
liquidity conditions and signalling the stanceof monetary policy. They provide the
bulk of liquidity to the financial sector. They
are regular, liquidity-providing, reverse
transactions, conducted as standard tenders,with a weekly frequency and a maturity of
two weeks. In 1999 the Eurosystem
conducted a total of 52 MROs. The allotmentvolumes varied between 
39 billion and102 billion, with the average amountingto 69 billion.The operational framework of the Eurosystemprovides for the possibility of carrying out eitherfixed rate or variable rate tenders. The ECB hasso far only applied fixed rate tenders in the
Eurosystem™s MROs. Fixed rate tenders are
conducted in such a way as to allow the ECBboth to signal clearly the stance of monetary
policy and to allot the amount of liquidity it
considers necessary given the anticipatedautonomous factor flows. In the MROs
conducted through fixed rate tenders, the
interest rate of the operation is pre-announced.
Counterparties submit bids at the pre-
announced rate. The ECB then matches thebids with its own estimate of the liquidity needsof the banking sector, mainly determined by
reserve requirements and autonomous factorforecasts. If bids are higher than the forecast
liquidity needs, as is usually the case, the ECB
normally determines an allotment ratio below100%.The average amount of bids submitted to the
MROs conducted in 1999 was 954 billionand the average amount allotted was
69 billion. The average ﬁallotment ratioﬂ(i.e. the average of the ratios of the liquidity
actually allotted by the ECB to the total
amount of bids in individual tenders) was10.8%. The smallest amount of bids,67.4 billion, was recorded in the operationon 6 April 1999, in an environment of strongexpectations of a lowering of the interestrate on the MROs within the same
maintenance period. All bids were satisfiedby the ECB on that occasion, implying anallotment ratio of 100%. The highest
bids, 2,344 billion, were observed on2 November 1999, in an environment ofstrong expectations of an increase in the rate
on the MROs within the same maintenanceperiod. The chosen allotment volume of66 billion implied an allotment ratio of
2.82%, which was the lowest ever observed.
While the average amount of bids increasedin the first three quarters of the year (the

average amounts of total bids in the firstthree quarters of the year were 674 billion,763 billion and 1,274 billion respectively),they fell slightly in the fourth quarter, to anaverage total volume of 1,104 billion.9
50The evolution of the volume of bids submittedcan be explained by the expectationsprevailing among credit institutions withregard to the relative cost of obtaining funds
in the interbank market, compared with theinterest rate on the MROs. A state ofequilibrium between the expected cost of

refinancing with the central bank and the
expected cost of obtaining funds through theinterbank market (including a premium for

the higher uncertainty of market funding) has
to be achieved in order to prevent the bids
of banks from either escalating or drying up.

Central banks can control the averageovernight rate by virtue of determining thequantity of bank reserves. Generally (i.e. in
the absence of strong expectations regardinginterest rate changes), they thus have themeans to ensure the achievement of this
equilibrium for any tender rate within thecorridor set by the standing facilities.The ECB tended to orient its allotmentdecisions towards ensuring an averageinterbank overnight rate close to the tender
rate. This policy implied that, on average in1999, the EONIA rate was 2½ basis pointshigher than the rate on the MROs. Moreover,
the volatility of the EONIA rate was lowthroughout the year, although it was higherat the end of the reserve requirement
maintenance periods.1.3The longer-term refinancing
operationsIn addition to the MROs, the Eurosystem
also conducts longer-term refinancing
operations (LTROs), which are regular
liquidity-providing reverse transactions,conducted as standard tenders with a monthlyfrequency and a maturity of three months.
They provide only a limited part of the globalrefinancing volume and are not, as a rule,conducted with the intention of steering the
liquidity situation, of sending signals to themarket or of guiding market interest rates.
In order for the Eurosystem to act as a
rate-taker, LTROs are usually conducted in
the form of variable rate tenders withpre-announced allotment volumes. This was
indeed the case in all 14 LTROs in 1999. Theallotment volumes were pre-announced by
means of press releases for longer periods
and then confirmed in the tender
announcements on the day before theallotment decision. While the first 11 LTROs

in 1999 had a volume of 15 billion, the lastthree amounted to 25 billion, thus also
contributing to a smooth transition to the
year 2000. On average over the year, a
volume of liquidity of 49 billion wasprovided through this type of operation, and

316 counterparties submitted bids.The first three LTROs of the year werespecial insofar as they were conducted inparallel on 14 January and two of them had ashortened maturity (of 42 and 70 days
respectively) in order to phase in three
outstanding LTROs without delay. While thefirst four LTROs were conducted as single
rate auctions (Dutch auctions), from Marchonwards all LTROs were conducted as
multiple rate auctions (American auctions) in

order to orient them towards usual marketpractices.For all operations conducted between Marchand September, the weighted average ratesin the LTROs carried out through a multiple
rate auction were 1 basis point above themarginal rate, reflecting a low and stabledispersion of expectations. The picture was
different in the LTRO settled on 28 October,when the marginal rate was 23 basis pointsbelow the weighted average rate, reflecting
heterogeneous but increasing expectationsof a hike in the MRO rate as well asheterogeneous preferences induced by the

maturing of the operation after the transitionto the year 2000. In the operations conductedon 24 November and 22 December

respectively, the situation partiallynormalised, with the spread between themarginal and the weighted rates falling to
9 and 3 basis points respectively.519
1.4Other open market operations
Besides the two regular reverse operations,the Eurosystem™s operational framework
provides for fine-tuning and structural
operations on an ad hoc basis. Theseoperations may also be conducted in the form
of reverse operations, but the Eurosystemhas a wide range of other ways ofimplementing such non-regular operations,
namely as outright transactions, as foreignexchange swaps, via the issuance of debt
certificates and in the form of a collection of
fixed-term deposits. The instruments andprocedures applied to the conduct offine-tuning operations can be adapted to the
types of transaction and the specificobjectives pursued.In 1999 the Eurosystem did not conduct anyfine-tuning or structural operations, butrelied exclusively on the main and
longer-term refinancing operations for its
liquidity management, as well as on the availablestanding facilities, benefiting from the averaging

mechanism inherent in the minimum reserverequirement system. At the beginning of 2000,exceptional market conditions prompted the

Eurosystem to conduct a liquidity-absorbingfine-tuning operation. It collected one-weekdeposits through a variable rate quick tender
amounting to 14.2 billion in order to
withdraw the excess liquidity accumulated atthe end of 1999 as a consequence of the events
surrounding the transition to the year 2000.
1.5Standing facilities
The standing facilities are aimed at providingand absorbing overnight liquidity on theinitiative of credit institutions, signalling thegeneral stance of monetary policy and setting
an upper and a lower limit for overnightmarket interest rates. The marginal lendingfacility can be used to obtain overnight
liquidity from the Eurosystem against eligible
assets. The interest rate on the marginal
lending facility normally provides a ceiling for
the overnight market interest rate.The deposit facility can be used to depositovernight surplus funds with the Eurosystem.The interest rate on the deposit facilitynormally provides a floor for the overnight
market interest rate. Thus the two facilitiestogether determine a corridor for theovernight market rate. The width of this

corridor varied in 1999 between 50 basispoints (between 4 and 21 January, with theaim of facilitating the adaptation of credit
institutions to the new framework) and 250basis points between 22 January and 8 April.The corridor had a width of 200 basis points
from 9 April to the end of the year.Over the year, the daily recourse to themarginal lending and deposit facilitiesamounted, on average, to 1 billion and0.8 billion respectively. Particularly intenserecourse to the standing facilities was
nonetheless witnessed in January 1999,namely an average of 6.0 billion for themarginal lending facility and 2.0 billion forthe deposit facility. This high use of thestanding facilities was due in part to the fact
that their costs were kept very low until21 January, but also suggested that theinterbank market had still to adapt to the
new environment.While a large simultaneous recourse to bothstanding facilities on one day, which could beinterpreted as an indication of the lack ofperfection of the interbank market, has not
occurred, except at the very beginning of the
year, a high use of only one facility is normallyan indication of aggregate liquidity imbalances.
Such imbalances typically occur at the end ofmaintenance periods when the averagingmechanism of the reserve requirements can,
by definition, no longer operate. The averageuse of the marginal lending and depositfacilities on the last day of the 11 maintenance
periods of 1999 was 3.6 billion and6.8 billion respectively. However, at theend of any given maintenance period when

there was a large recourse to one of thestanding facilities, the other was scarcelyused, indicating that the interbank market
was rather successful in allocating funds evenon the last days of maintenance periods.9
52Moreover, even considerable recourse to thestanding facilities at the end of individualmaintenance periods and high volatility of theinterbank overnight rates, have typically had
no lasting influence on longer-term money
market rates, thus not creating uncertainty
with regard to the stance of monetary policy.1.6The minimum reserve system
During 1999 the two main functions ofthe minimum reserve system, namely
the stabilisation of money market interestrates and the enlargement of the structuralliquidity deficit of the banking sector, were
successfully fulfilled. The previouslymentioned smoothing effect of the minimumreserve system on the EONIA rate is
primarily associated with the stabilising roleplayed by the averaging features of theminimum reserve system. With regard to
the enlargement function, the levels ofrequired reserves usually accounted for more
than 50% of the total refinancing needs of the
banking sector (i.e. the total outstandingamount of regular open market operations).
Furthermore, the remuneration of the
required reserves at the level of the mainrefinancing rate of the Eurosystem ensuredthat the system did not impose a significant
cost on banks.Given the smooth functioning of the minimumreserve system, its main features (i.e. the
averaging provisions, the duration of themaintenance period and the remuneration of
the required reserves) were not changed in1999. Similarly, no changes were made to thereserve ratio, the reserve base and
the amount of the lump-sum allowance
(100,000) which is deductible from the
required reserves. The only element modified

during 1999 was the standardised deductionfrom the reserve base applicable by eachindividual credit institution to liabilities
vis-à-vis credit institutions of the euro areasubject to the ECB™s reserve requirements.In the case of liabilities in the form of debt
securities with an agreed maturity of up totwo years and money market paper, creditinstitutions were allowed, during 1999, toapply a standardised deduction of 10% if theycould not provide evidence of that kind ofliability vis-à-vis other credit institutions
established in the euro area. After reviewingthe statistical evidence available for 1999, theECB decided on 2 December to modify the
standardised deduction from the reserve baseto 30% with effect from January 2000. Creditinstitutions readily adapted to the new
reporting schemes and methods for thecalculation of the minimum reserves. As aconsequence, cases of non-compliance with
the minimum reserve requirements wererather limited in the course of 1999. After agrace period of three months, to allow credit
institutions to adapt to the new singlemonetary policy, a framework for thesanctioning of breaches of obligations
regarding the minimum reserve requirementswas enforced by the ECB.1.7The Eurosystem™s eligible collateral
and its use for credit operationsAll Eurosystem credit operations Œ intradaycredit and monetary policy operations Œ must
be based on adequate collateral provided bythe Eurosystem™s counterparties. In order totake account of differences in the financial
structure of Member States, assets eligiblefor credit operations include a large numberof different instruments. A distinction is made
between two categories of assets eligible forthe credit operations of the Eurosystem.These two categories are referred to as ﬁtier

oneﬂ and ﬁtier twoﬂ respectively. Thisdistinction was made exclusively for purposesinternal to the Eurosystem and has no bearing

on the quality of the assets and their eligibilityfor the various types of operations, exceptthat tier two assets would not normally
be used by the Eurosystem in outrighttransactions.Tier one consists of marketable debt
instruments fulfilling uniform euro areaeligibility criteria specified by the ECB. Tier

two consists of assets which are of particularimportance to the national financial markets539
and banking systems and for which eligibilitycriteria are established by the NCBs, subjectto approval by the ECB.As at mid-December 1999 the amount ofmarketable eligible assets available forEurosystem operations was almost 5,700billion (up from over 5,300 billion in January1999). The overwhelming proportion of thisamount (96%) was composed of tier one
assets. Measured by issuer, 62.7% of themarketable tier one assets were governmentsecurities, 32.8% securities issued by credit
institutions, and 4.2% corporate paper. Interms of maturity, 93% of the assets were
longer-term bonds and medium-term notes,
while 6.5% were short-term securities;
equities and other marketable tier two assetswere negligible in amount (0.3% and 0.2%
respectively).Eurosystem counterparties may use eligible
assets on a cross-border basis, i.e. obtain
funds from the NCB of the Member State inwhich they are established by making use of
assets located in another Member State (see
Chapter V).In the course of 1999, at the request ofseveral NCBs, the ECB conducted anassessment of new categories of assets which
either had not existed in 1998 or with regardto which changes making them compliant with
the minimum eligibility criteria of the ECB
had occurred in the course of 1999. As a
result, these categories of assets were added
to the list of eligible collateral for the
Eurosystem™s credit operations.1.8Participation of Eurosystem
counterparties in monetary policyoperationsThe Eurosystem™s monetary policy frameworkis formulated with a view to ensuring
the participation of a broad range ofcounterparties. Institutions subject to the
Eurosystem™s minimum reserve requirement

system are eligible as counterparties for openmarket operations (OMOs) based onstandard tenders and for accessing thestanding facilities.1 At the end of December
1999 around 7,900 euro area creditinstitutions were subject to reserve
requirements. Out of these, around 4,100
had direct or indirect access to a real-timegross settlement system™s account, which is
an operational condition for participating inmonetary policy operations. Around 3,800had access to the deposit facility, and 3,200
could access the marginal lending facility.In order to have access to OMOs,
counterparties may need, furthermore, to
have access to the national tendering systems,as was the case for the approximately 2,500counterparties which could potentially
participate in OMOs in 1999. Around 200institutions have been selected bythe Eurosystem for potential fine-tuning
operations conducted through quick tender
or bilateral procedures.The number of counterparties effectivelyparticipating in the MROs ranged from 1,068 (inJanuary 1999) to 302 (in April 1999), whereas
the number of participants in the LTROs variedbetween 466 (in January 1999) and 198 (inSeptember 1999). In the second half of 1999
there was a trend towards a reduction in thenumber of counterparties participating in theEurosystem™s operations compared with the first

half of the year. In parallel, a decline in the shareof small-scale institutions participating in theMROs relative to larger institutions was

observed during the year, which seems to
indicate a decline of the incentives for smallerinstitutions to participate in the MROs. These

developments may be attributed to severalfactors, including, inter alia, the ongoingconsolidation process in the banking industry
and a perception by counterparties that thedifferentials between the rates applied by theEurosystem in its operations and the EONIA
rates were rather narrow.1Pursuant to Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB, the ECB
generally requires credit institutions established in participating
Member States to hold minimum reserves. A definition of
ﬁcredit institutionsﬂ is contained in Article 1 of the First Banking
Co-ordination Directive (77/780/EEC), i.e. ﬁan undertaking
whose business is to receive deposits or other repayable funds
from the public and to grant credit for its own accountﬂ.9
541.9Money market developments
Following the introduction of the euro andthe new monetary policy framework, the

money market went through a process ofdeep integration throughout the euro area.However, such integration was not
homogeneous across the various marketsegments: the unsecured deposit market, inwhich banks exchange short-term liquidity
without the guarantee of collateral, and thederivatives markets experienced fasterintegration, while the repo market, in which
participants exchange short-term liquidity
against collateral, and the short-termsecurities markets (Treasury bills, commercial
paper and certificates of deposit) still havemuch scope for further integration. From
the very start of Stage Three of EMU, cross-

border transactions in the euro area moneymarket increased substantially and currentlyrepresent more than 50% of overall activity
in all segments of the money market. That
development was fostered by the smoothfunctioning of the TARGET system for the

transfer of large-value funds throughout theeuro area and the other EU countries.TARGET has proven to be a key element in
ensuring an efficient redistribution of liquidityacross the euro area.The unsecured and swap segments of themoney market were those that experiencedthe most far-reaching changes, includingthe substantial increase in cross-border
transactions which can be seen both as areflection and as a cause of those changes. Italso explains their homogeneity and the high
level of liquidity. Such homogeneity is evident,in particular, for the overnight maturity, asshown by the very limited differences
between the overnight rates observed in theindividual euro area countries.Other structural changes observed in theeuro area money market since theintroduction of the euro include: a surge in
the liquidity of secondary markets; increasedconcentration of euro cash managementactivities compared with the situation
prevailing in the formerly fragmented money
markets; increased competitiveness and alarger number of counterparties actually
available to individual banks. A description ofstructural developments in the euro areamoney markets can be found in the article
entitled ﬁThe euro area one year after theintroduction of the euro: key characteristicsand changes in the financial structureﬂ in the
January 2000 issue of the ECB Monthly
Bulletin.2Investment of foreign exchange assets and own funds
2.1The foreign reserve assets of the
EurosystemThe Eurosystem is responsible for holdingand managing the foreign reserves of the
Member States. Both the ECB and theNCBs hold foreign reserves. Although the
NCBs manage their own foreign reserves

independently, their operations in the foreignexchange market are subject, above a certainlimit, to the approval of the ECB, in order to
ensure consistency with the single monetarypolicy of the Eurosystem.The transfer of foreign reserves from theNCBs to the ECB took place at the very
beginning of 1999 for the maximum
permissible amount of 50 billion, adjusteddownwards by deducting the shares in theECB capital of the NCBs of the countriesnot participating in Monetary Union from
the outset. This amounted to 39.46 billion,i.e. around 80% of 50 billion. The foreignexchange reserves represent a very large part
of the assets side of the ECB Balance Sheet.In accordance with Article 123 of the Treaty,further calls by the ECB on the NCBs™ foreign
reserve assets are possible, subject tosecondary European Community legislation;a recommendation for an EU Council
Regulation has been put forward by the ECB.559
The currency distribution of the foreignreserves of the ECB has been defined on thebasis of prospective operational needs and
may change if and when appropriate. 15% of

the foreign reserves pooled at the ECB weretransferred in the form of gold, while theremaining 85% are denominated in US dollars
and, to a lesser extent, Japanese yen. There
is no active management of the currencycomposition of reserves for investment
purposes, in order to avoid any interferencewith the single monetary policy of the
Eurosystem.2.2The Eurosystem™s approach to
foreign reserve managementThe management of the ECB™s foreignreserves has to ensure that, at any point intime, the ECB has an adequate amount ofliquid resources at its disposal for any foreign
exchange intervention. If interventions wereto take place, the foreign reserves pooled atthe ECB would be used. Liquidity and security
are therefore the basic requirements for theinvestment of the ECB™s foreign reserves.
Subject to these constraints, the ECB™s
foreign reserves are managed to maximisetheir value. Furthermore, the managementof the foreign reserves also allows the
Eurosystem to enhance its knowledge ofmarket techniques and its forward-lookingunderstanding of the behaviour of market
participants.The ECB™s foreign reserves are managed in adecentralised manner by the euro area NCBs.The key investment guidelines and thestrategic benchmark are determined by the

Governing Council, and the Executive Boarddecides on the tactical investment framework.In addition to the currency distribution, the
ECB defines four key parameters for theinvestment of its foreign reserves in the US
and Japanese bond markets. The key
parameters are, first, a two-level investmentbenchmark (i.e. a strategic and a tacticalbenchmark) for each currency; second,
permitted deviations from these benchmarks
in terms of the interest rate risk; third, a list
of eligible instruments and operations; and,fourth, limits for credit risk exposures. NCBsuse the leeway given to them by the deviationbands and risk limits to maximise the return
on the portfolios they manage on behalf ofthe ECB, within a real-time monitoringframework established by the ECB. When
conducting the ECB™s investment activity,
NCBs act on behalf of the ECB, on a disclosed
agency basis, so that the ECB™s counterparties

in the international financial markets can
distinguish the operations carried out by theNCBs on behalf of the ECB from those
carried out by NCBs while managing theirown reserves.The counterparties used for operationsinvolving the ECB™s foreign reserve assets areselected in consultation with the NCBs, on

the basis of creditworthiness and operational
efficiency. The general principle for definingthe instruments to be used is primarily

defined by the requirements of security andliquidity. Subject to these constraints, theEurosystem strives to use state-of-the-art

portfolio and risk management practices andtechniques.2.3The ECB™s own funds management
The ECB has been endowed with an initialcapital of approximately 
4,000 million. Theprincipal purpose of the capital is to endow
the ECB with a reserve fund which shouldprovide it with sufficient income, whilemaintaining an appropriate level of security.

In accordance with Article 123 of the Treaty,an increase in the capital of the ECB ispossible, subject to secondary European
Community legislation; a recommendation foran EU Council Regulation has been putforward by the ECB.Since all of the ECB™s own funds are currentlyinvested in euro-denominated assets, it
is of utmost importance to prevent anyinterference with the ECB™s monetary policydecisions. Thus, in order to prevent the

misuse, or even the mere suspicion of misuse,
of privileged information in the management9
56of the ECB™s own funds and to protect theECB™s reputation, a specific set-up has beenestablished along the lines of a Chinese wallconcept, i.e. a strict functional and physical
division between the unit managing the ownfunds and the other units of the ECB.The basic investment framework isconsistent with the methodology applied tothe ECB™s foreign reserve management (see
Section 2.1 above), taking into account thefact that the predominant share of the ECB™sown funds is invested in euro-denominated
long-term interest rate instruments. In
addition, the ECB follows a relatively passiveinvestment approach, particularly in themoney market area, in order not to generate
any monetary policy signals. Following theacquisition by the ECB of the status of BIS
shareholder, on 7 December 1999, part ofthe ECB™s capital was also used to financethe purchase of the BIS shares.The list of eligible counterparties for theECB™s own funds investment and the
relevant legal documentation, while preparedseparately from those corresponding to
the management of the ECB™s foreign

reserve assets, meet the same criteria of
creditworthiness and operational efficiency.3Payment and settlement systems operations
3.1The TARGET system
Start of TARGET live operationThe Trans-European Automated Real-timeGross settlement Express Transfer(TARGET) system was designed to serve twomain objectives: first, to facilitate the

integration of the money market in euroin order to allow for the smoothimplementation of the single monetary policy
and, second, to improve the soundness andefficiency of intra-EU cross-border paymentsin euro. It successfully commenced live

operation on Monday, 4 January 1999,together with several other large-valuepayment systems in euro. Owing to the fact
that the banks needed some time to adapt to
the new payment systems environment andto new treasury management practices, the
ESCB provided an ﬁextended service windowﬂbetween 11 and 29 January 1999 by delayingthe closing time of TARGET by one hour
from 6 p.m. to 7 p.m. To avoid any abuse of
this arrangement a special fee of 15 waslevied for each payment made during the

extra hour of operation. Since the banksincreasingly adjusted to a more efficient wayof managing their liquidity, it did not prove

necessary to continue to make use of theextended opening hours of TARGET.Nevertheless, in order to make it easier forTARGET participants to manage their
end-of-day positions, the ECB decided that,as from 5 February 1999, the deadline for
requesting access to the marginal lending
facility of the Eurosystem should coincidewith the corresponding deadline for thedeposit facility, i.e. 30 minutes after the actual
closing time of TARGET.Development of TARGET in 1999TARGET can be accessed by some 34,000institutions (mostly credit institutions,
including their branches and subsidiaries)
throughout the EU. In 1999 the number of
payments processed in the system as a whole,
i.e. cross-border and domestic payments
taken together, was 163,157 as a daily
average, representing a value of 925 billion.Cross-border activity in TARGET steadily
increased over the whole period. Compared
with January 1999, the December 1999 figuresshow an increase of 58% in terms of volumeand 6% in terms of value. The share of
cross-border payments in all TARGETpayments processed in 1999 was 18% with
regard to volume (a daily average of 28,777
payments) and 39% with regard to value(a daily average of 360 billion). The peak579
days thus far have been 22 February 2000, asfar as volume is concerned, with around52,000 cross-border payments beingprocessed, and 31 January 2000, as far
as value is concerned, with the totalvalue of payments processed amounting to522 billion.The average value of individual transactionsprocessed by TARGET and other large-value
euro payment systems decreased during 1999.The main reason for this was the progressiveshift of commercial payments from
correspondent banking into organised paymentsystems. In December 1999 34% of cross-
border payments processed through TARGET
were customer payments, while, in January1999, these accounted for only 15%. UsingTARGET and other large-value systems for
customer payments instead of correspondentbanking allows corporate customers to improvetheir cash management.In the TARGET section of its website theECB provides and regularly updates statistical
data on TARGET and the different nationalreal-time gross settlement (RTGS) systemsparticipating in it or connected to it.Operational frameworkIn technical terms TARGET has provedcapable of processing a significant number

of large-value payments within shorttransmission times. The requirement of fullcollateralisation of intraday credit did not
turn out to be a problem and the pricedifference between TARGET and alternativesystems has not deterred banks from using
TARGET extensively. Even the larger banks,which may have cheaper alternatives forprocessing their payments, use TARGET for
their very large-value payments, for whichthe system offers advantages in terms ofrisk and liquidity management. Moreover,
many small and medium-sized banks whichlack access to other systems have foundTARGET to be an efficient alternative to
correspondent banking.Owing to the importance of TARGET forthe euro area money market and itsinterdependence with different large-valuepayment and settlement systems in euro,
a very high level of technical availabilityneeds to be ensured. In this respect, theperformance of some system components
was, however, not always fully satisfactory.In those cases the improvement of system
availability has been actively addressed and
given highest priority.With regard to TARGET operating days, in1999 the system closed on New Year™s Day,Christmas Day and, in order to enhance thesafety of the transition to the year 2000,
exceptionally on 31 December. The paymenttraffic was, however, rather low on other dayswhich are traditionally public (or bank) holidays
in most of the euro area countries. Therefore,and following a request from the Europeanbanking industry, the ECB decided in July 1999
to have six closing days in 2000 in addition toSaturdays and Sundays: New Year™s Day, GoodFriday, Easter Monday, 1 May (Labour Day),
Christmas Day and 26 December. These daysare, de facto, non-settlement days for the
money market and the financial markets in euro,
as well as for foreign exchange transactionsinvolving the euro. However, in some of thoseeuro area countries in which one of these days
is not a public holiday, the national RTGS system
will be open for limited domestic paymentactivity.Dialogue with TARGET usersDuring 1999 the ECB regularly reported ondevelopments related to TARGET, both in
the TARGET section of its website and in thequarterly issues of its Monthly Bulletin. More
detailed information on TARGET, specifically
addressed to the users of the system, wasmade available by the NCBs in the secondquarter of 1999 in an updated version of the
ﬁInformation guide for credit institutionsusing TARGETﬂ.To continue to remain attractive, TARGEThas to meet present and future market needs.
9
58In this respect, an active exchange of viewsand co-operation with its users play animportant role. During 1999 the ECBtherefore conducted a survey on the cross-
border payment service offered by TARGET,as perceived by its users. The main findings
of this survey were presented in the report
entitled ﬁCross-border payments in TARGET:
A users™ surveyﬂ, which was published by theECB in November 1999. Input for this report
was obtained by means of a questionnaireaddressed to the different European bankingassociations and to the national TARGET user

groups. In addition, a meeting with marketparticipants on the subject of TARGET andlarge-value payment systems, held at the ECB
in September 1999, provided valuableinformation. One of the findings of the reportwas that a large group of credit institutions
is satisfied with the present TARGET
service level. However, large participants inparticular would prefer a higher degree of
harmonisation of the service provided by thedifferent RTGS systems participating inTARGET. The requests of these banks ranged
from the harmonisation of message formatsto the provision of a uniform service
throughout TARGET. The Eurosystem will
actively continue to seek input and feedbackfrom national TARGET user groups and,more generally, from the banking and financial
community.3.2The correspondent central banking
modelThe correspondent central banking model(CCBM) was established in order to facilitatethe cross-border use of collateral in the
Eurosystem™s monetary policy operations andthe intraday credit operations of the ESCB.Within the CCBM the national central banks
act as correspondents for each other andthereby enable counterparties to use all theireligible assets to obtain credit from their
national central bank.Experiences with the CCBM during the first
year of operation have shown that it hassuccessfully met the aims for which it wascreated. The value of assets held in custodyon a cross-border basis increased constantly,amounting to 162.7 billion at the end of1999. Of the total amount of collateral
provided by the counterparties, around 17%is held via the CCBM. The use of the CCBM
has been asymmetric among countries, with
most activity being concentrated among a
few NCBs. The main collateral providers(acting as correspondent central banks) are
Italy, which accounts for almost half of allcollateral that is used on a cross-border basis,Belgium and Germany. However, the main
collateral users (acting as home central banks)
are Germany, which uses about one-quarterof all cross-border collateral, the Netherlands
and France. Owing to the relative scarcity
of domestic collateral in Ireland andLuxembourg, foreign collateral held via the
CCBM on a cross-border basis amounts to90% of all collateral held by counterparties inLuxembourg and 55% of that held in Ireland.
Analysis also shows that during the first yearof operation, counterparties did not activelyuse assets once they were held as collateral
in the CCBM. On average, assets were held
as collateral for a period of at least fourmonths before the counterparty asked for
its return. The cross-border use of tier twoassets is insignificant. Since these assets areof particular importance at the national level

only, it is no surprise that they are rarelyfound in foreign counterparties™ portfolios.So far, the CCBM has been the main tool for
the cross-border delivery of collateral usedin the credit operations. Alternative meansfor these cross-border transfers, i.e. the links
between securities settlement systems, theuse of which has been allowed since May1999, were used for around 4% [updated

figure] of all collateral holdings at the end of1999.The fees for cross-border transfers via theCCBM were increased as from 1 October1999. The primary aim was to cover the

costs which the NCBs incurred in setting upthe model and continue to incur in runningit. Once more experience with the use of the
CCBM had been gained, a study wasundertaken to determine the actual costs599
incurred. As a consequence, the fee of5 per CCBM transaction was replaced by amultiple fee composed of a transactionfee of 30 and a combined custody andadministration fee of 0.0069% per annum. Thecombined custody and administration fee isbased on the amount of collateral held in theCCBM. As was previously the case, the new
fees are intended to cover the costs of thecorrespondent central bank which holds thecollateral on behalf of the home central bank.
The latter can continue to claim additionalfees to cover its own costs incurred inrunning the CCBM.4Risk management
The main quantifiable and non-quantifiable
risks arising from monetary policy andpayment systems operations of theEurosystem and operations involving the
foreign reserve assets and own funds of the
ECB are credit risk, market risk, liquidity
risk and operational risk. A framework for
identifying, monitoring and managing risksarising from these operations is in place. Thisrisk management framework has been
developed in line with best market practices.
Credit riskCredit risk is the risk of incurring a loss dueto the failure (bankruptcy) of a counterpartyin a contractual relationship or of an issuer
of a security held by the Eurosystem. The
Eurosystem incurs credit risk in monetary
policy operations and payment systemsoperations (principally via the TARGET
system, through the provision of intradayliquidity), and the ECB incurs credit risk inforeign exchange operations and own funds
management operations.Credit risk related to monetary policy and
payment systems operations is limited by the
use of assets provided by counterparties ascollateral pledged to the Eurosystem in the
course of open market operations and theprovision of intraday liquidity. Only high-quality
assets are eligible for these operations. The
credit risk is controlled by using consistent andprudent eligibility criteria throughout theEurosystem. Credit risk related to foreign

exchange reserves holdings and own fundsmanagement is limited by selectingcounterparties and issuers with a high creditstanding. Moreover, credit risk limits forcountries, issuers and counterparties are set up
to limit the exposure to any eligible country,

issuer and counterparty.Market riskMarket risk is the risk of incurring a lossdue to movements in interest rates (interestrate risk) and foreign exchange rates(exchange rate risk). In the field of market
risk management of the ECB™s foreign
exchange operations and own funds
management operations, the following
constitute the key elements of the marketrisk management framework: strategicinterest rate benchmarks, currency
distribution benchmarks, a list of eligibleinstruments and a reporting system mainlyfocused on market risk exposures and
portfolio performance.Interest rate risk related to foreign exchange
reserves holdings and own funds managementis mainly controlled on the basis of modified
duration. The modified duration of the own

funds and foreign reserve portfolios is limitedby deviation bands around the modifiedduration of the strategic benchmarks. The
exchange rate risk of the foreign reserveportfolios is limited by deviation bandsaround the currency distribution benchmark.
Value at risk measurements are also in placeto complement the analysis of exposures. Theperformance of the own funds and foreign
reserve portfolios is monitored and reportedon an ongoing basis.9
60As regards monetary policy and paymentsystems operations, the market riskembedded in the underlying assets deliveredas collateral is managed throughout the
Eurosystem by applying appropriate riskcontrol measures (e.g. haircuts and margins).Liquidity riskLiquidity risk is the risk of being unable tounwind or offset a particular position, withoutdifficulty, at or near the previous market price
owing to inadequate market depth ordisruptions in the market-place. In monetarypolicy and payment systems operations, the
liquidity risk embedded in the underlyingassets is mitigated by risk control measuresapplied to these assets. In foreign exchange
and own funds operations, it is limited by theappropriate choice of eligible instruments and
a suitable maturity structure of the portfolios.Operational riskOperational risk is the risk of incurring lossesdue to system failures, human error, breaches
in internal control, fraud, catastrophes orother unforeseen events affecting itsoperations. Adequate internal controls of all
operational flows have been set up in orderto diminish operational risk. Contingencyfacilities are maintained by the Eurosystem to
support its operations.Current developmentsAttention is being devoted to the continuedimprovement of risk management. Current
developments include the analysis of riskmanagement systems and methodologies and
the discussion of risk management practicesat the Eurosystem level.
619
Chapter IIIEconomic developmentsin the other countriesof the European Union9
64The Eurosystem and the NCBs of the
non-participating EU countries co-operateclosely in the context of the General Councilof the ECB with a view to contributing to the
maintenance of price stability in the EU as awhole. In this context, the review ofmacroeconomic conditions as well as monetary
and exchange rate policies is an integral part of
the co-ordination exercise between theEurosystem and the four NCBs currently
not participating in the euro area. Althoughthese NCBs conduct their monetary policiesunder different institutional and operational
frameworks, the ultimate goal of monetary
policy in all of them is to maintain price stability.
DenmarkIn Denmark real gross domestic product
(GDP) increased by an estimated 1.5% in1999, slowing to well below the euro area

average and the high growth rates of around
3% or more achieved from the middle of1993 until 1998. In the course of 1999 the
impact of government action in 1998 to
reduce domestic demand and increase savings
(the Whitsun package), combined with the
impact of higher long-term interest rates,contributed to a marked slowdown in thepace of domestic demand. The external
outlook improved, however, and providedsupport for net exports, resulting in arenewed current account surplus. Overall,
compared with most euro area countries,Denmark still enjoyed a relatively advancedposition in the business cycle and a positive
output gap. In 1999 the Danish labour market
conditions continued to tighten; theunemployment rate was 4.1% in December,

the lowest rate in almost 20 years, as labour
supply failed to increase despite recent labourmarket initiatives. In addition, real wage
increases in 1999 were above productivitygrowth, as in the previous two years.
As a result of wage growth of around 4% andthe fact that declining oil prices no longeracted as a counterweight, inflationary
pressures continued to rise in 1999.Consequently, the spread in the rate ofincrease in the Harmonised Index ofConsumer Prices (HICP) against the euroarea widened and stood at 1.4 percentagepoints in December 1999, as the HICP
reached 3.1% compared with an average of1.3% in 1998. Wage increases in industrybecame somewhat more moderate, but
increased in the more sheltered servicessector. The apparent increase in total wage
costs in 1999 was, however, mainly the result
of the conflict in the labour market in thespring of 1998, which distorted the data for1998 by making the total wage bill lower than
usual.Since the substantial fiscal consolidation in theperiod from 1993 to 1997 (when the budget
balance moved from a deficit of 2.9% of GDPto a surplus of 0.1% of GDP), the general

government budget balance has been improvingfurther in recent years. The Whitsun fiscalausterity package, which will gradually lower
tax deductions for interest payments and
increase indirect taxes over the period1999-2002, was introduced in June 1998 in
order to counteract inflationary pressuresarising from the significant increase in domesticdemand. The general government surplus
reached 3% of GDP in 1999, almost2 percentage points higher than in the previousyear, while the debt-to-GDP ratio also

continued to improve. In 1999 it decreased by3 percentage points to 52.6%.The monetary policy strategy of Danmarks
Nationalbank implies that monetary policy isgeared towards stabilising the exchange rate
of the Danish krone vis-à-vis the euro.Denmark has been participating in ERM IIsince 1 January 1999, with a narrow band of
±2.25% around the euro central rate. TheDanish krone remained stable in 1999 arounda level marginally stronger than its ERM II

central rate of DKK 7.46038 against the
euro. In the first half of 1999 DanmarksNationalbank cut its key interest rates twice,
reducing the lending rate by 50 basis points
on 9 April Œ following a similar decision by
the Eurosystem Œ and by 5 basis points on

17 June 1999. Accompanying the increases in
Eurosystem interest rates, the central bank659
then raised its lending rate by 45 basis pointson 4 November 1999, by 30 basis points on3 February 2000 and by 25 basis points to3.85% on 16 March 2000. Taking the year as

a whole, short-term interest rates as measuredby the three-month money market rates, roseby 0.2 percentage point and the spread vis-à-vis
the comparable euro area rates remainedbroadly stable at around 20 basis points. At theend of February 2000 short-term interest rates

amounted to 4.1%, constituting a spread of50 basis points against euro area rates.Long-term interest rates as measured byten-year government bond yields followed theinternational increase in levels throughout

1999, rising by some 1.3 percentage points.In February 2000 the spread vis-à-vis theaverage euro area rates amounted to around
30 basis points, i.e. broadly unchanged sincethe beginning of 1999.GreeceGreece continued to experience buoyanteconomic growth in 1999. The 1998 rate of
GDP growth (3.7%) decreased only slightlyto 3.5% in 1999, mainly as a result of a small
negative contribution of net exports to GDP

growth. Growth continues to be drivenmainly by public and private investment. Realgross fixed capital formation grew by 8.1% in

1998 and by 8.3% in 1999. Reversing the
previous deceleration, growth in privateconsumption increased from 2.1% in 1998

to 2.6% in 1999. The unemployment ratedeclined somewhat to an estimated annualaverage of 10.5% in 1999. Employment growth
declined from 3.4% in 1998 to 1.2% in 1999. 11The high employment growth figure for 1998 reflects the fact
that over 200,000 previously illegal immigrants were granted a
work permit.19931994199519961997199819991999199919991999
Q1Q2Q3Q4
Real GDP0.85.83.72.83.12.71.50.51.81.0.
Contribution to real GDP growth: 1)Real domestic demand including stocks0.66.65.02.44.24.4.0.4-0.90.6.
Net exports0.4-0.8-1.40.4-1.1-1.6.0.32.50.4.
HICP0.91.82.02.11.91.32.11.41.82.32.8
Compensation per employee2.33.53.52.93.83.0.4.56.33.7.

ULC, whole economy0.0-2.50.51.42.82.4.6.34.33.6.
Import prices-0.71.52.40.22.1-0.7-0.3-2.7-1.90.43.1
Current plus new capital account (% of GDP)....0.1-0.1.0.20.10.2.
Total employment-1.5-0.40.71.42.12.11.02.3-0.01.0.
Unemployment rate (% of labour force)10.18.27.26.85.65.14.54.84.54.44.2
Fiscal balance (% of GDP) 2) 3)
-2.9-2.4-2.3-1.00.11.23.0----
Consolidated gross debt (% of GDP) 2)
78.073.569.365.061.355.652.6----
three-month interest rate (% per annum) 4)
11.06.26.13.93.74.13.33.53.03.13.6
ten-year long-term interest rate(% per annum) 4)
7.37.88.37.26.34.94.94.24.55.35.6
Exchange rate against the ECU or euro  4) 5)
7.597.547.337.367.487.507.447.447.437.447.44
Table 6Macroeconomic indicators for Denmark(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, national data and ECB calculations.Note: National accounts are according to the ESA 95. HICP data before 1995 are estimates based on national definitions and are notfully comparable with HICPs starting in 1995.
1)Percentage points.

2)Consistent with the Maastricht Treaty definition.

3)General government surplus (+) / deficit (-).

4)Average of period values.

5)Units of national currency per ECU until the end of 1998; thereafter per euro.
9
66The 1999 trade deficit (partly distorted byunrecorded exports) is estimated to havebeen at broadly the same level as in theprevious year, i.e. around 13% of GDP.The HICP inflation rate continued itsdownward trend in 1999. In September 1999
the annual percentage change in the HICPreached its lowest point (1.5%), that is to say2 percentage points below the January 1999
figure of 3.5%. In the last three months of1999, however, HICP inflation acceleratedsomewhat, mainly as a result of the increase
in energy prices, reaching 2.4% in December1999, 0.7 percentage point above the euro
area average.The main factors contributing to the overallreduction in inflation were the Bank of
Greece™s stability-oriented monetary policyand a considerable decline in the rate ofincrease in unit labour costs (from 5.5% in
1998 to 2.5% in 1999). The decline in unitlabour cost growth was, in turn, supportedby strong productivity growth and continued
wage moderation, following the two-yearagreement between the social partners signedin May 1998. Underlying inflation, as
measured by the HICP excluding seasonal
food and energy prices, was on a decliningtrend for most of 1999, falling from 4.4% in
January to 1.7% in December 1999. Otherexplanatory factors regarding the decline ininflation are a number of cuts in indirect taxes
in 1998 and 1999 and, to a lesser extent,
the Greek Government™s ﬁgentleman™sagreementsﬂ with industry to encourage price
restraint in the private sector. The combinedeffect of these tax cuts and the gentleman™sagreements is estimated to be around

1 percentage point.Following a sizeable general governmentdeficit reduction from 13.8% of GDP in 1993to 2.5% of GDP in 1998, fiscal consolidationcontinued in Greece in 1999 as the deficit
declined further to 1.6% of GDP. This declinewas attributable to the strong performanceof budget revenues, which rose from 50.8%
of GDP in 1998 to 51.7% of GDP in 1999.The total expenditure-to-GDP ratio, on theother hand, declined only marginally, from53.3% in 1998 to 53.2% in 1999, mainly drivenby the decline in interest payments. The
primary surplus also increased from 6.4% to

7.1% of GDP. Government debt declined by1 percentage point to 104.4% of GDP in 1999,at a slightly less rapid pace than in 1997 and
1998, when public debt fell by approximately3 percentage points in each year. This means
that the debt ratio developed less favourably
than the deficit ratio and nominal economicgrowth would suggest, owing, on balance,to unfavourable debt-deficit adjustments,
including capital injections into publicenterprises and revaluation effects. Theupdated convergence programme introduced

in December 1999 set out more ambitiousbudget targets than the previous convergenceprogramme, which was facilitated by better
than expected results in previous years. Thedeficit is projected to decline further to 1.2%of GDP in 2000 and to 0.2% of GDP in 2001.
The debt is anticipated to decline only slightlyin 2000, while a more sizeable decline, byalmost 4 percentage points, to 99.5% of GDP
is expected in 2001.The primary objective of the monetary policystrategy of the Bank of Greece continued tobe the maintenance of price stability, withthe latter being defined as a year-on-year
increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI)of below 2%. The Greek drachma joined the
ERM on 16 March 1998 and has been
participating in ERM II since 1 January 1999,observing a fluctuation band of ±15% aroundits central rate of GRD 353.109 against the
euro. Throughout 1999 the drachma tradedon average 8.4% above its central parity, asrequired by the price stability objective. On
17 January 2000 the central rate was revaluedby 3.5% to GRD 340.750 against the euro.As part of its monetary policy strategy, the
Bank of Greece has reference ranges for bothbroad money and domestic credit expansion,
which are both currently set at between 7%and 9% as annual growth rates. In 1999 thebroad monetary aggregate did not quite reach
the reference range, growing by an annualrate of 5.6%, while domestic credit expansion679
stabilised in the second half of 1999, partly asa consequence of the temporary reserve
requirements on banks for credit growthabove target imposed by the Bank of Greece.
Annual domestic credit growth remained,however, above its reference range in 1999at 12.3%.The Bank of Greece cut the fixed tender ratefor 14-day deposits to 12% on 13 January 1999

and further to 11.5% and 10.75% on 20 Octoberand 15 December 1999 respectively. On26 January and 8 March 2000 the Bank of
Greece cut  its key 14-day deposits rate by 100
and 50 basis points respectively, thereby
reducing it to 9.25%. At the beginning of 1999

short-term interest rates continued their declinefrom an average annual level of 13.9% in 1998
to around 10% in the second quarter of 1999.
Thereafter, short-term interest rates remained
broadly stable for the rest of the year, exceptfor a temporary increase in November 1999. Inthe first two months of 2000 the three-monthinterest rate (the ATHIBOR) declined further,standing at 8.7% at the end of February. This
translated into a spread of 510 basis points vis-à-vis similar euro area rates compared with aspread of 850 basis points at the beginning
of 1999.In the first few months of 1999 the decliningtrend in long-term interest rates alsocontinued, with ten-year interest rates fallingfrom 6.3% in January to 5.8% in May.
Subsequently, long-term interest ratesgradually increased to 7.0% in October, butfell once again to 6.4% at the end of February
2000. The differential vis-à-vis average euroarea yields narrowed from 250 basis points inJanuary 1999 to around 80 basis points in

February 2000.19931994199519961997199819991999199919991999
Q1Q2Q3Q4
Real GDP-1.62.02.12.43.43.73.5....
Contribution to real GDP growth: 1)Real domestic demand including stocks-1.01.34.23.54.43.43.9....
Net exports-0.60.7-2.1-1.1-1.10.3-0.4....
HICP...7.95.44.52.33.42.21.72.2
Compensation per employee9.810.812.98.812.45.84.8----

ULC, whole economy12.610.711.65.98.45.52.5----
Import prices7.75.86.85.02.25.10.6----
Current plus new capital account (% of GDP)-0.8-0.1-2.4-3.6-4.0-3.0-2.7----
Total employment0.91.90.9-0.4-0.33.41.2----
Unemployment rate (% of labour force)8.68.99.19.89.710.910.5----

Fiscal balance (% of GDP) 2) 3)
-13.8-10.0-10.2-7.4-3.9-2.5-1.6----
Consolidated gross debt (% of GDP) 2)
116.9109.3108.7111.3108.5105.4104.4----
three-month interest rate (% per annum) 4)
19.126.716.413.812.913.910.310.810.010.110.4
ten-year long-term interest rate(% per annum) 4)
23.420.917.314.610.28.56.36.15.96.66.7
Exchange rate against the ECU or euro 4) 5)
268288303306309331326323325326329
Table 7Macroeconomic indicators for Greece(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, national data and ECB calculations.Note: National accounts are according to the ESA 95.
1)Percentage points.

2)Consistent with the Maastricht Treaty definition.

3)General government surplus (+) / deficit (-).

4)Average of period values.

5)Units of national currency per ECU until the end of 1998; thereafter per euro.
9
68SwedenSwedish real GDP grew by 3.8% in 1999,
accelerating from 3.0% in 1998. The driving

force was, as in the previous year, attributableto strong growth in domestic demandresulting from favourable growth in real

disposable income (mainly on account of verylow inflation) and employment, rising assetprices and historically low interest rates.

Private consumption and capital formationshowed the largest increases, while thecontribution to growth from changes in
inventories was negative at -0.5 percentagepoint. In addition, export growth was lessaffected than expected by the slowdown in
world economic activity at the end of 1998and the beginning of 1999, while importgrowth decelerated considerably. The
contribution to growth from external tradethus turned positive again after being negativein 1998. Since the autumn of 1997 the
unemployment rate has been declining
significantly and employment accelerated
further in 1999, mainly in the private services
sector. Unemployment stood at 6.5% of thelabour force at the end of 1999 comparedwith an average of 8.3% in 1998. The trade

surplus reached nearly the same level as in
1998, i.e. 6.9% of GDP, while the currentaccount surplus declined marginally and stood

at 2.8% of GDP.Consumer price inflation started to rise fromvery low levels in 1999 mainly as a resultof higher oil prices. Underlying inflation, asmeasured by UND1X (CPI excluding interest

expenditure and direct effects of altered indirecttaxes and subsidies), increased from below1% in 1998 to 1.9% in December 1999.
HICP inflation in December 1999 was 1.2%,0.5 percentage point below the euro area
average. For most of the year Sweden was one
of the three best-performing EU Member States
in terms of price stability. However, real wagescontinue to increase faster than productivity
growth and remain the main risk to pricestability and employment in the medium term.
Following marked fiscal consolidationbetween 1993 and 1998, when the budgetbalance improved from a deficit of 11.9% of
GDP to a surplus of 1.9% of GDP, publicfinances remained stable in 1999 at a levelof 1.9% of GDP. In 1999 the debt ratio
decreased by 6.9 percentage points to 65.5%of GDP. The updated Swedish convergenceprogramme, introduced in November 1999,
gives the budget surplus targets for 2001 and2002 as 2% of GDP. The debt is projected todecline by 6.7 percentage points in 2000 to
58.8% of GDP and further to 54.1% of GDP
in 2001.On 1 January 1999 new central bank legislation
was introduced to reinforce the independenceof Sveriges Riksbank. The primary objective of
monetary policy in Sweden is to achieve price
stability. Sveriges Riksbank has operated with aflexible exchange rate regime and conducted
monetary policy with an explicit inflation targetsince 1993. Monetary policy is targeted atkeeping CPI inflation at 2%, with a tolerance
margin of ±1 percentage point. At the beginningof 1999 clarification was given regarding theformulation of monetary policy in Sweden.
Sveriges Riksbank explicitly stated thatdepartures from the inflation target may bewarranted if, for instance, inflation is influenced
by temporary factors. This was the case in 1999.In practice, monetary policy was based on anassessment of underlying inflation, UND1X,
which recorded an average level of 1.5% in1999.Reflecting two cuts in Sveriges Riksbank™srepo rate Œ totalling 50 basis points Œ to 2.9%
in March 1999, short-term interest rates

declined at the beginning of 1999. The
repo rate was raised by 35 basis points on11 November 1999 and by 50 basis points
to 3.75% on 4 February 2000 as inflation
prospects for the next one to two years wereestimated to be marginally higher than their
target. Short-term interest rates rose even
more towards the end of the year. The spreadbetween the Swedish and euro area
short-term interest rates narrowed slightlyin the course of 1999 and stood at 50 basispoints by end-February 2000. In 1999 and the
first two months of 2000 the Swedish kronaappreciated by some 10% against the euro699
after having experienced a depreciation ofapproximately the same magnitude in the
second half of 1998. The appreciation of thekrona was mainly due to the improved growth
prospects for the Swedish economy.Long-term interest rates rose in the courseof 1999 by 1.6 percentage points and furtherto 5.8% by the end of February 2000. Theten-year spread vis-à-vis the euro area
broadened slightly in the course of 1999,reflecting, inter alia, the improved cyclicaloutlook for Sweden in relation to the euro
area. At the end of February 2000 the spread
had narrowed somewhat to 30 basis points.
United KingdomIn the United Kingdom real GDP grew by
2% in 1999 compared with 2.2% in 1998.Following a slowdown in the latter part of1998, the pace of activity picked up duringthe course of 1999. Growth was drivenby domestic demand, notably consumer
spending, reflecting significant real wageincreases, lower mortgage interest paymentsand rising asset prices (particularly house
prices). However, export volume growth,although improving around the middle ofthe year, lagged significantly behind import
volume growth owing to the strength ofsterling, the subdued growth of some exportmarkets and the rapid growth of domestic
demand, resulting in a continued negative
contribution of net exports to GDP growthfor the year as a whole. Despite the
somewhat slower output growth there was afurther fall in unemployment in 1999. The
annual average unemployment rate fell to
6.2% compared with 6.3% in 1998.19931994199519961997199819991999199919991999
Q1Q2Q3Q4
Real GDP-1.84.13.71.12.03.03.83.93.73.83.8
Contribution to real GDP growth: 1)Real domestic demand including stocks-5.12.91.90.70.83.53.33.82.13.63.7
Net exports3.31.21.90.41.3-0.50.50.11.60.20.1
HICP...0.81.81.00.60.20.30.71.0
Compensation per employee4.73.06.73.13.43.33.23.2..

ULC, whole economy.-0.10.55.10.41.52.41.73.8..
Import prices13.34.76.5-3.51.9-1.02.5-1.02.53.64.9
Current plus new capital account (% of GDP)-1.70.72.92.63.33.62.02.51.13.3.
Total employment-5.5-0.91.6-0.6-1.11.42.22.73.01.81.5
Unemployment rate (% of labour force)9.19.48.89.69.98.37.07.57.06.96.6

Fiscal balance (% of GDP) 2) 3)
-11.9-10.9-6.8-3.4-2.01.91.9----
Consolidated gross debt (% of GDP) 2)
75.879.077.676.075.072.465.5----
three-month interest rate (% per annum) 4)
8.87.78.86.04.44.43.33.33.13.23.7
ten-year long-term interest rate(% per annum) 4)
8.69.710.28.06.65.05.04.24.55.55.7
Exchange rate against the ECU or euro 4) 5)
9.119.169.338.528.668.918.818.988.908.718.65
Table 8Macroeconomic indicators for Sweden(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, national data and ECB calculations.Note: National accounts are according to the ESA 95.
1)Percentage points.

2)Consistent with the Maastricht Treaty definition.

3)General government surplus (+) / deficit (-).

4)Average of period values.

5)Units of national currency per ECU until the end of 1998; thereafter per euro.
9
70Inflation continued to remain subdued and
the rate of increase in prices, as measured bythe retail price index excluding mortgageinterest payments (RPIX), was 2.3% in 1999
compared with 2.7% in 1998. Annual average
inflation as measured by the HICP was 1.4%in 1999, i.e. 0.3 percentage point higher than

the euro area annual average, compared with1.6% in 1998. However, at the end of 1999and in early 2000 HICP inflation was well
below the euro area average. A number offactors may have helped to contain pricedevelopments. These include the appreciation
of sterling, increased competition in the retailsector and some further pressure by theregulators of utilities to lower prices in these
industries. While overall inflation remainedsubdued, house prices rose more rapidly,buoyed by historically low mortgage rates
and the improving economic situation andoutlook.In 1999 the general government balance-to-GDP ratio showed a surplus of 1.2%compared with 0.3% in 1998. Governmentexpenditure declined to 39.9% of GDP from

40.3% of GDP in 1998, while receipts rosemarginally to 40.6% of GDP from 40.5% ofGDP. The debt-to-GDP ratio decreased to

46% in 1999 compared with 48.4% in 1998.During 1999 the UK Government continuedto set the Bank of England the monetarypolicy objective of meeting an inflation targetdefined as a 2.5% increase in the RPIX. The
Bank™s repo rate was 6.25% at the start of1999 and was progressively cut to 5% in June,reflecting the weakness of the economy in
the early part of the year and its likely impacton future inflation. However, from8 September 1999 to 10 February 2000
official interest rates were raised in fourstages (by 25 basis points each time) to 6%.19931994199519961997199819991999199919991999
Q1Q2Q3Q4
Real GDP2.34.42.82.63.52.22.01.41.62.12.9
Contribution to real GDP growth: 1)
Real domestic demand including stocks1.93.31.83.03.74.13.54.03.22.84.0
Net exports0.10.91.0-0.5-0.3-2.1-1.6-2.7-1.7-0.9-1.3
HICP2.52.02.62.51.81.61.41.61.41.21.2
Compensation per employee3.63.42.03.24.65.4.4.94.64.8.

ULC, whole economy0.1-0.51.41.72.93.8.4.24.03.4.
Import prices8.63.16.10.3-6.7-6.3-2.6-3.8-3.2-2.3-1.1
Current plus new capital account (% of GDP)-0.2-0.0-0.00.00.1-0.0.-0.2-0.1-0.1.
Total employment-1.20.81.11.01.81.01.21.21.31.21.1
Unemployment rate (% of labour force)10.59.88.88.37.36.36.26.36.05.95.9
Fiscal balance (% of GDP) 2) 3)
-8.0-6.8-5.8-4.4-2.00.31.2----
Consolidated gross debt (% of GDP) 2)
45.548.752.152.650.848.446.0----
three-month interest rate (% per annum) 4)
5.95.56.76.06.87.35.45.55.25.25.9
ten-year long-term interest rate
(% per annum) 4)
7.58.28.37.97.15.65.04.44.85.45.5
Exchange rate against the ECU or euro 4) 5)
0.780.780.830.810.690.680.660.690.660.650.64
Table 9Macroeconomic indicators for the United Kingdom(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, national data and ECB calculations.Note: National accounts are according to the ESA 95. HICP data before 1995 are estimates based on national definitions and are
not fully comparable with HICPs starting in 1995.
1)Percentage points.

2)Consistent with the Maastricht Treaty definition.

3)General government surplus (+) / deficit (-).

4)Average of period values.

5)Units of national currency per ECU until the end of 1998; thereafter per euro.
719
This reflected concerns about upward risksto future inflation, given the strength of worlddemand, domestic consumption (including
effects resulting from the housing market)

and continuing tight conditions in the labourmarket. Short-term market interest rates fellby around 1 percentage point to 5.1% in the
first eight months of 1999, before rising againto 6.2% in late February 2000. The interestrate differential with the United Kingdom™s

euro area counterparts stood at 260 basispoints at the end of February 2000.Sterling appreciated significantly against theeuro in 1999. This appreciation may partlyhave reflected cyclical divergence betweenthe UK and euro area economies in recentyears. In addition, sterling was probablysupported by the strength of the US dollar,

given the close historical dollar-sterling link,and the strength of the US economy.Long-term interest rates increased by around1 percentage point in the course of 1999 andstood at 5.4% by the end of February 2000.

The ten-year spread against comparable euroarea rates disappeared at the end of February2000, compared with 50 basis points at the
start of 1999.9
72Chapter IVEuropean/internationalco-operation and theEurosystem9
741European issues
1.1Bilateral relations
In the course of 1999 the ECB establishedclose relations with the central banks ofnon-EU neighbouring countries. The Eurosystem
takes a keen interest in economicdevelopments in such countries, in particularwith regard to sustainable economic growth
and stability-oriented policies, not least owingto the increasing role of the euro as ananchor for monetary and exchange rate
policies. Therefore an ongoing dialogue andco-operation with the monetary authoritiesof these countries is of crucial importance.The Eurosystem focused its attention onthree groups of states within Europe:
First, the accession countries preparing for
entry into the European Union (Bulgaria,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland,Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia). Although
Turkey was granted the status ofaccession country at the Helsinki EuropeanCouncil on 10 and 11 December 1999, the
conditions to be fulfilled before the startof negotiations have yet to be met.Second, the 
countries which form theEuropean Free Trade Association (Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland)

and which already exhibit a high degree of
economic and institutional integration withthe EU (as established by the European
Economic Area Agreement and otheragreements).Third, regions and territories of the WesternBalkans, in particular Kosovo and theRepublic of Montenegro, where, in the

wake of the 1999 Kosovo conflict,
efforts Œ initiated by the internationalcommunity Œ were made to bring peace
and stability to the area and to rebuild theeconomy.Accession countriesThe Eurosystem has a keen interest in the
prospect of the accession of new EU MemberStates, as well as in their subsequent
participation in the new exchange rate
mechanism (ERM II) and their eventualadoption of the euro after strict fulfilment of
the required preconditions. In this context, apermanent dialogue between the Eurosystemand the central banks of accession countries
is considered essential, with a view to their
future integration into the ESCB and,eventually, the Eurosystem itself.Officially recognised accession countriesalready enjoy a special status and maintain
close relations with the EU. In the course of1999 the EU and six accession countries(Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Poland and Slovenia) startednegotiations on the ﬁEMU chapterﬂ, i.e. theimplementation of the provisions of the
Treaty establishing the European Communityand derived EU legislation relating toEconomic and Monetary Union. The EU made
clear its intention not to make any ﬁoptingoutﬂ status available to the accession
countries. For their part, the accession
countries did not request any specifictransitional arrangements. Therefore, thepreliminary round of negotiations on the
EMU chapter has been closed. Negotiationswith a further six accession countries(Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Romania
and Slovakia) started in February 2000. Theexact time frame for EU accession has yet tobe set, although the Helsinki European
Council in December 1999 agreed that ﬁtheUnion should prepare itself to be in a position
to welcome new Member States from the
end of 2002 as soon as they have
demonstrated their ability to assume theobligations of membership and once the
negotiating process has been successfullycompletedﬂ.759
The Eurosystem is not directly part of thenegotiation process. However, some form
of association with the broader accession
process is necessary, in particular with a view
to issues which fall within the Eurosystem™s
exclusive, or shared, areas of competence,namely monetary policy, foreign reserve
management, exchange rate policy, paymentsystems, collection of certain statistical dataand financial stability.Regarding the issues of particular concern tothe Eurosystem, the accession process may
be divided into four different steps, each ofwhich should be considered separately.First, before accession to the EU, applicantcountries will be free to pursue theirmonetary and exchange rate policies
independently. The Eurosystem monitorsthese policies and developments in accessioncountries closely, not least in view of their
prospective EU membership. Applicantcountries will have to ensure that the 
acquiscommunautaire (which has recently also
become known as the 
acquis de l™Union)related to EMU is transposed into nationallegislation and implemented effectively before
accession.In the pre-accession phase, applicantcountries will be obliged to fulfil the accessioncriteria set at the Copenhagen EuropeanCouncil in 1993. These imply, inter alia, ﬁthe
existence of a functioning market economyas well as the capacity to cope withcompetitive pressure and market forces

within the Unionﬂ and ﬁthe ability to takeon the obligations of membership includingadherence to the aims of (–) economic and
monetary unionﬂ.Compliance with the aforementionedﬁCopenhagen criteriaﬂ requires accessioncountries to undertake numerous structuralreforms and to complete the transition from

their former status as planned economiesto well-functioning market economies,
promoting a process of real convergence,which is necessary to improve their living
standards and to integrate their economiesfurther into the EU. Even though fulfilmentof the Maastricht criteria on nominalconvergence is not mandatory for accession,ﬁadherence to the aimsﬂ of EMU also implies
a willingness to strive for gradual progress in
nominal convergence
 and the implementation
of stability-oriented monetary and fiscal

policies. In sum, real and nominal convergence
are two components of the same strategyfor achieving sustainable non-inflationary
economic growth and should therefore bepursued in parallel.Second, upon accession to the EU
 the new
Member States will enter into Economic andMonetary Union, but with the special status
of ﬁMember States with a derogationﬂ. Inconcrete terms this means that, in accordancewith the wording of the Treaty establishing
the European Community, they shall treattheir exchange rate policy as a matter ofcommon interest (Article 124) and regard
their economic policy as a matter of commonconcern (Article 99). However, they will notimmediately introduce the euro, and the
responsibility for monetary policy in theirterritories will remain in the hands of therespective central banks. In institutional
terms, the central banks of new EU countrieswill become members of the ESCB. As is
currently the case for the central banks of
Denmark, Greece, Sweden and the UnitedKingdom, they will be represented on theGeneral Council of the ECB but not on the
Governing Council, the supreme decision-
making body of the ECB. The central banks
will, inter alia, have to contribute to the
statistical framework of the ESCB and ensure,once they have joined the euro area, theconsolidation of their accounts (the other
tasks of the General Council of the ECB arelisted in Section 2.3 of Chapter XI).Third, after joining the EU (even if not
necessarily upon accession) the new Member
States will be expected to enter into ERM II Œ
linking the currencies of the non-participatingmembers (at present, the Danish krone andthe Greek drachma) to the euro. With regard

to the terms of entry into ERM II, it shouldbe feasible to take into account country-9
76specific economic conditions, given the
flexible features of ERM II.Finally, the new Member States will be in aposition to participate fully in the euro area.Membership will be subject to an examinationof the convergence situation in each case,
which will be carried out at least once everytwo years, or at the request of the countriesthemselves. Once they fulfil the necessary
conditions as set out in the Maastricht Treaty,they will adopt the euro.Progress towards the introduction of theeuro will not necessarily be uniform in all
accession countries. Against the background
of different starting-points and degrees ofeconomic transition, a plurality of approaches
should be feasible without compromising

equality of treatment. The nominal
convergence criteria should be implementedin such a way that these countries are
provided with clear references necessary tobring their economies into line with thestandards and the final goal of EMU.The Eurosystem is prepared to advise thesecountries in their pursuit of appropriate

structural reforms and stability-oriented policiesin line with the accession and convergencecriteria. The Eurosystem is also willing to
provide accession countries with technicalassistance in its field of competence. In fact,
several euro area national central banks (NCBs)
already provide the central banks of theaccession countries with technical support in abroad number of areas and will continue to do

so. Requests for technical assistance fromaccession countries can be expected to increasefollowing their preparatory work for integration
into the ESCB and, later on, the Eurosystem.
Therefore, the Eurosystem is developing
appropriate procedures to meet this increasing
demand in a co-ordinated manner, whileensuring that all accession countries receive thenecessary support. In this context, full use will
be made of the resources and expertise
available within the Eurosystem, while adoptingconsistent approaches and strategies.The Helsinki seminar on the accessionprocessTo open a dialogue with the monetaryauthorities of the accession countries, a high-level seminar on the accession process tookplace in Helsinki from 10 to 12 November
1999, bringing together the Eurosystem and
governors and deputy governors of thecentral banks of Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia.The seminar was organised jointly by the ECB
and Suomen Pankki, the Finnish central bank.The objective of the seminar was to carryout a review of the central banking issuesinvolved in the accession process, to identifythe main problem areas and to enhance co-

operation between the Eurosystem and thecentral banks of accession countries.The fruitful and comprehensive discussionscovered a wide array of issues, ranging fromthe adoption of the EMU-related acquis
communautaire to exchange rate strategies
of the accession countries and to therequirements of smoothly functioning banking
systems and financial markets.Similar events will be held in the years tocome, starting in Vienna in 2000.Seminars with central banks of accessioncountries hosted by the ECBFollowing the Helsinki seminar, a number ofspecialised multilateral events were organisedat the ECB. They formed part of a structured
policy of multilateral contacts, both at thepolicy level (i.e. governors and deputy
governors) and at the expert level, involving
all relevant business areas of the ECB.
Such multilateral events were supplementedby bilateral visits to the ECB by delegationsfrom the central banks of accession countries,allowing for more detailed exchanges of views

at management and staff level, in particularwith a view to the prospective inclusion of779
these central banks in the ESCB. The ECBintends to intensify both multilateraland bilateral co-operation with accessioncountries™ central banks.Relations with the central banks of EFTAcountriesIn 1999 the ECB carried on the tradition ofmaintaining contact with the central banks ofIceland, Norway and Switzerland, whichinvolves regular meetings at governor level
twice a year. At these meetings a broad setof issues of common interest is reviewed.The ECB also concluded a swap agreementwith Norges Bank, which became effective
on 1 January 1999 for a period of 12 months.
The agreement replaced similar bilateral swaparrangements between Norges Bank and theeuro area NCBs. As requested by Norges
Bank, the Governing Council decided inDecember 1999 to renew the swapagreement for the year 2000 for an amount

of 1,500 million.Monetary developments in the WesternBalkansAs part of the stabilisation efforts pursuedby the United Nations Interim AdministrationMission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the aftermath
of the conflict, the latter designated the
Deutsche Mark as the ﬁcurrency to be usedfor payments made to a public authorityﬂ and
liberalised the denomination of contracts andother voluntary transactions in ﬁany foreigncurrency that is widely accepted in the
territory of Kosovoﬂ. In practice, banknotesdenominated in Deutsche Mark were alreadyused in Kosovo as a main tool for cash
transactions and a store of value before thenew legislation entered into force.On 2 November 1999 the Government of
the Republic of Montenegro announced thatﬁin addition to the Yugoslav dinar, the
German mark is introduced as the means ofpayment in Montenegroﬂ. In the case ofMontenegro, as in Kosovo, banknotes
denominated in Deutsche Mark have
traditionally played a major role as a store of
value and a tool for making payments.In the case of both Kosovo and the Republicof Montenegro, any reference in their
legislation to the Deutsche Mark shouldobviously be read as if it were made to theeuro. The respective authorities took these

decisions unilaterally and without anyimplication for the Eurosystem, either in
terms of legal obligations or of policy
constraints.1.2Co-ordination of national economic
policies in the European UnionThrough its participation in a number of EUfora (such as the Economic and FinancialCommittee and the Economic Policy
Committee) the ECB became involved in
discussions about a coherent co-ordinationframework.The relevance and justification of economicpolicy co-ordination in EMUEconomic and Monetary Union (EMU), as setout in the Treaty, institutes a single monetarypolicy in the euro area and created for thispurpose the ESCB. However, the economic
facet of EMU did not give rise to a singleeconomic policy. Rather, the Treaty requiresMember States to ﬁregard their economic

policies as a matter of common concernﬂ(Article 99). In order to render this principle
operational, the provisions of the Treaty
prescribe common policy guidelines (theBroad Economic Policy Guidelines) and amultilateral surveillance exercise. In the
run-up to the introduction of the euro, theMember States endeavoured to flesh out theframework of the Treaty, by developing new
co-ordination procedures (such as theStability and Growth Pact) and by furtherrefining existing ones.9
78While the creation of the European
Community™s single market had alreadyproduced an unprecedented depth ofeconomic integration among EU Member
States, the introduction of the euro makeseconomic developments in euro area MemberStates a more direct and immediate concern
of national policy-makers. Economic policydecisions in one country can produceﬁspilloverﬂ effects for other euro area
Member States, in particular via the singleeuro area financial market and the changing
perception of market participants. Fiscal laxity
in one country, for instance, might generateupward pressure on long-term interest rates,which in turn alters economic conditions

throughout the euro area.At first sight, the case for closer co-
ordination of economic policies appearsclear-cut. To the extent that the
responsibility for the conduct of interlinked
economic policies is attributed to differentactors, co-ordination might help to reducenegative spillovers, create peer pressure,

facilitate the exchange of best practices andthereby generate positive welfare effects.However, in order to reap the benefits of
co-ordinating economic policies, it is essentialthat co-ordination takes an appropriate formand supports rather than conflicts with
the ﬁco-ordinatingﬂ forces of markets. Inthe current EMU set-up, co-ordinationprocedures range from more stringent rule-
based approaches (e.g. Stability and GrowthPact) to more discretionary or less formalapproaches centred on policy dialogue
(e.g. the ﬁCardiff processﬂ for the monitoringof structural reform).The role of the Eurosystem in the EUeconomic policy frameworkThe role of the Eurosystem is determined bythe stipulations of the Treaty governing its
status and activities, notably its independenceand the primary objective of maintaining price
stability. As a consequence, the Eurosystem

cannot engage in any form of agreementaimed at bringing about a predeterminedﬁpolicy mixﬂ, since this could commit theEurosystem to pursue a monetary policywhich might conflict with the primaryobjective of price stability.The clear separation of policy responsibilities
between monetary authorities and
governments is rooted in the belief Œconfirmed by decades of practical
experience and a substantial body of economic
research Œ that committing monetarypolicy-makers to the primary objective ofmaintaining price stability helps significantly
to achieve price stability in a credible andlasting manner. In this way, monetary policywill make the best possible contribution to

the broader economic objectives of theEuropean Union and its citizens.Since economic policy co-ordination relatespredominantly to co-operation among theMember States themselves, the ECB™s
contribution to the overall co-ordinationprocess lies in a dialogue with competentEuropean bodies, notably the Council of
Ministers and the Euro-11 Group, wherebyviews and information are exchanged. In thisdialogue, the prerogatives and independence

of policy actors are respected.Policy co-ordination instruments and fora
Economic policy co-ordination in the EU is
conducted in an annual policy cycle, whichcentres on the Broad Economic PolicyGuidelines. These guidelines, which are
approved each year by the European Council,are intended to steer the general conductof economic policy and make specific

recommendations to each Member State. TheBroad Economic Policy Guidelines are thepivot of all existing co-ordination processes,
uniting them under a single overarchingstructure and gearing them towards a singletimetable. Specialised co-ordination processes

apply to budgetary policy (in the frameworkof the Stability and Growth Pact),
employment policy (generally referred to as

the ﬁLuxembourg processﬂ) and structuralreform policies (generally referred to as the
799
ﬁCardiff processﬂ) Œ each of them with a
distinctive set of rules and co-ordination fora.In addition, the European Employment Pactinstituted the Macroeconomic Dialogue,
which is explained in more detail inSection 1.3 below.In line with the conclusions of the 1997
Luxembourg European Council, the mainlocus of economic policy co-ordination is the
Council of Economics and Finance Ministers
(ECOFIN) which, in particular, adopts therecommendation setting out the Broad
Economic Policy Guidelines and issuesopinions on the stability and convergenceprogrammes. In accordance with the
provisions of the Treaty (Article 113), thePresident of the ECB is to be invited tosessions of the EU Council whenever matters
relating to the objectives and tasks of theESCB are discussed. Members of theExecutive Board of the ECB attend Council
meetings on an ad hoc
 basis in order toparticipate in exchanges of views on generaleconomic matters in a broader sense. In
addition, informal ECOFIN sessions and the
informal meetings of the Euro-11 Group Œ towhich the ECB can be, and has indeed been,
regularly invited Œ allow for a frank exchangeof views and thus provide a forum for anopen dialogue between ministers and the
ECB.1.3Macroeconomic Dialogue
At its meeting in Cologne on 3 and 4 June1999 the European Council took the initiativeto establish a European Employment Pactaimed at achieving a sustainable reduction of
unemployment. Specifically, the EuropeanEmployment Pact is built on three ﬁpillarsﬂ,all of which are viewed as long-term
processes to be developed over time and inthe light of changing circumstances. Thesethree pillars consist of two previously existing
initiatives, namely the Luxembourg andCardiff processes (see above), and a new,third pillar, the Cologne process, bringing
together the Member States, the EuropeanCommission, the monetary authorities andthe social partners at the EU level in a regular
Macroeconomic Dialogue.The ECB participated in the first meetings ofthe Macroeconomic Dialogue at both thetechnical and the political level (on29 October and 8 November 1999
respectively) and will continue to participatein future meetings.Scope and purposeIn the context of the preparatory work onthe formulation of the European EmploymentPact, it was agreed that the establishment of
a Macroeconomic Dialogue should not leadto the creation of new institutions or to
cumbersome procedures. It was nonetheless
considered worthwhile to establish a forum
within which the various policy actors couldbe kept informed of developments in other
relevant policy areas. Moreover, a regularexchange of views among the main policyactors was regarded as an essential tool
for fostering greater mutual understandingconcerning the creation of appropriateconditions for higher, non-inflationary growth
and, with it, a sustainable reduction inunemployment.The European Council™s Resolution on theEuropean Employment Pact clearly states thatthe Broad Economic Policy Guidelines are to
remain ﬁthe central instrument for economic
policy co-ordination in the EUﬂ. Moreover,the appropriate guidelines for the various

macroeconomic policies are described in thesame resolution as follows: ﬁFiscal policy is
required to respect the objectives of the
Stability and Growth Pact which impliesbringing budgets securely close to balance or
to a surplus over the medium term. Wagesmust keep a sustainable path, with wage
developments that are consistent with pricestability and job creation. The primary
objective of 
monetary policy is to maintain
price stability. For this, it is crucial thatmonetary policy be underpinned by fiscal and
wage policies of the type described above.ﬂ
9
80Principles of ECB participationFrom the outset, the ECB expressed itswillingness to participate in a macroeconomic
policy dialogue in order to exchangeinformation and views with those partiesresponsible for the conduct of fiscal and
structural policies and the negotiation ofwage settlements. Nonetheless, it wasnecessary to ensure that to do so would not
conflict with the ECB™s independence as laiddown in Article 108 (ex Article 107) of the
Treaty, which prohibits the ECB from taking
instructions from any other institution orbody when carrying out its tasks and
objectives. Accordingly, the need to respect
the ECB™s independence, along with that ofall participants, was acknowledged by theEuropean Council in its resolution on the

European Employment Pact.The ECB™s role in the dialogueThe ECB has identified a number of ways in
which it might best contribute to the
Macroeconomic Dialogue. First, the ECB can
provide a comprehensive assessment of theeconomic outlook and, against this
background, explain the reasoning behindits monetary policy decisions. Second, theMacroeconomic Dialogue offers an
opportunity for the ECB to share its viewsconcerning the major economic policychallenges which lie ahead and the
appropriate direction of macroeconomic and
structural policies to achieve the ultimateaim of sustained growth and high employment
in an environment of price stability.2International issues
The introduction of the euro implies atransfer of core central banking competenciesfrom the national to the Community level.

Thus, with the exception of exchange ratepolicy, which is a responsibility sharedbetween the ECOFIN Council and the
Eurosystem, and banking supervision policies,to which the Eurosystem contributes,monetary policy and related central banking
tasks (e.g. management of official reserves)are an exclusive competence of theEurosystem. On matters related to the

Eurosystem™s exclusive tasks, internationalrepresentation rests solely with theEurosystem, customarily through the ECB,
while the participation of the euro area NCBs
varies, depending on the membership of theinstitutions or fora concerned.Appropriate arrangements for the
international representation of the euro area
by the Eurosystem have to take two specificfeatures into account. The first relates to thefact that membership of different fora (for
example the G7 or the G10) varies acrosseuro area Member States, which is alsoreflected at the central bank level. The secondderives from the fact that intergovernmentalinstitutions such as the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) or the Organisationfor Economic Co-operation andDevelopment (OECD) are organised on the
basis of country membership.Against this background, arrangements wereimplemented in 1998 and at the beginning of1999 in order to establish working relationsbetween the ECB and relevant international
institutions and fora. These arrangementswere put into operation in 1999 for the firsttime. Some of them were worked out in the
context of changes in the institutional
framework of multilateral co-operation (seeSection 2.1). The ECB has also started

developing bilateral relations with centralbanks outside the European Union (seeSection 2.2). In this context two issues were
the main focus of the ECB in 1999: thestrengthening of the architecture of theinternational monetary and financial system
(see Section 2.3) and the international role ofthe euro (see Section 2.4).819
2.1The activities of the ECB in the field
of multilateral co-operationThe International Monetary Fund (IMF)
The ECB participates in the activities of the
IMF with an observer status, at the level of
both the International Monetary and FinancialCommittee (IMFC, formerly the InterimCommittee) and the IMF Executive Board.
The IMF Board of Governors decided on30 September 1999 to transform the IMF
Interim Committee into the IMFC. Comparedwith its predecessor, the new Committeehas been given a permanent standing, which
is reflected in the organisation of preparatorymeetings at the level of deputies. Apart fromthese changes, the creation of the IMFC
leaves the current institutional setting of the
IMF broadly unaffected, with the Board ofGovernors as the highest decision-making
body, delegating the day-to-day business tothe Executive Board. The IMFC, like the
former Interim Committee, will advise and

report to the Board of Governors onthe supervision of the management andadaptation of the international monetary and
financial system. Several observers, includingthe President of the ECB, participate in themeetings of the IMFC.In order to enable the ECB to be representedon the IMF Executive Board, a permanent
representative in Washington, D.C. withobserver status at the IMF was appointed bythe President of the ECB on 8 February 1999.In the context of his mandate (see Box 6),
inter alia, the ECB observer represented the

Eurosystem at the meeting of the IMFExecutive Board on 26 March 1999, at which
the first staff report on ﬁMonetary and
Exchange Rate Policies of the Euro Areaﬂwas discussed. Subsequently, a PublicInformation Notice (PIN) was released by

the IMF on 23 April 1999, making available tothe public the assessment of the members of
the IMF Executive Board of euro area
economic policies. In the context of the nextconsultation cycle in 2000, the euro area willparticipate in the pilot project for the
voluntary release of the IMF staff report onmonetary and exchange rate policies of theeuro area. This pilot project is an important
element of the IMF™s ongoing efforts to
improve transparency, which is fullysupported by the Eurosystem.G7 Finance Ministers and Central BankGovernors and related groups (FSF, G20)
The President of the ECB, together with theEU Presidency, represented the euro area inthe three meetings of the G7 financeministers and central bank governors which
took place in 1999.The President of the ECB represented theEurosystem as far as the review of exchangerates and multilateral surveillance issues wereconcerned. Central bank governors of the
euro area G7 countries (Germany, Franceand Italy) took part in the G7 sessions on thereview of progress being made towards
strengthening the international financialarchitecture. On the basis of their discussion,the G7 finance ministers issued a report to
the Cologne Economic Summit (18 June1999) on ﬁStrengthening the InternationalFinancial Architectureﬂ.Financial Stability Forum (FSF)
At their meeting in Bonn in February 1999,the G7 finance ministers and central bank
governors endorsed the recommendation ofthe Tietmeyer Report to set up the FSF.Its objectives are to assess vulnerabilities
affecting the international financial system, toidentify and oversee action needed to addressthese vulnerabilities, and to improve co-
ordination and the exchange of informationamong the various authorities responsible forfinancial stability. The FSF is made up of the

national authorities responsible for financialstability in the G7 countries (namely ministers
of finance, central banks and supervisory
agencies). Several international institutionsand groupings which are concerned with9
82financial stability, either as standard-settingagencies or through their involvement in thesurveillance and monitoring of financialsystems, are also members of the FSF
(e.g. the BIS, the IMF, the World Bank and
the OECD). The ECB participates in the FSFas an observer.At its meeting on 15 September 1999 the FSFbroadened its membership to four non-G7
countries representing major financial centres(the Netherlands, Singapore, Australia and
Hong Kong).Box 6The function and activities of the ECB permanent representationin Washington, D.C.The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) decided on 21 December 1998 to grantobserver status to the ECB. Pursuant to this decision, the ECB observer has a standing invitation to
represent the Eurosystem in IMF Executive Board meetings in which issues relevant to euro area monetary

and exchange rate policies are discussed. This includes:Œmeetings that are part of the surveillance process with euro area authorities, namely Article IV surveillance
over the common monetary and exchange rate policies of the euro area and the policies of individual euroarea Member States;Œthe role of the euro in the international monetary system;

Œthe process of multilateral surveillance by the IMF (World Economic Outlook, International Capital
Markets, World Economic and Market Developments).In addition, the ECB observer is invited to take part, on a case-by-case basis, in meetings concerning itemsrecognised by the ECB and the IMF as being of mutual interest for the performance of their respective

mandates. Against this background, the ECB has set up a permanent representation in Washington, D.C.
The ECB representative™s activities relating to such observer status at the IMF include participation in themeetings of the IMF Executive Board on topics falling into the above-mentioned categories as well as actingas primary contact between the IMF and the ECB on other matters of common interest. The representative alsoaccompanies the IMF delegations during their missions to the ECB in the context of IMF surveillance under
Article IV over the common monetary and exchange rate policies of the euro area. Furthermore, as a memberof the ECB delegation to the IMF annual meetings and the spring meetings of the International Monetary andFinancial Committee, the representative assists the President of the ECB, who participates in these meetings as
an observer.The ECB representation in Washington, D.C. maintains contacts with the US authorities, in particular theFederal Reserve System. In addition, the representation gathers information on developments in the UnitedStates and gives information to interested parties on euro area-related topics. As part of these tasks therepresentative maintains contacts with the financial community, academia and research institutions in the
United States.The FSF met twice in 1999. Subsequent to its
April meeting, three working groups wereset up in order to analyse issues of relevanceto systemic stability: Highly Leveraged
Institutions, Capital Flows and OffshoreFinancial Centres. These groups preparedinterim reports for the FSF members which
were presented at the meeting in September1999 (see Section 2.3 for further details). Atthis meeting the FSF also agreed to establish
a Task Force on the Implementation ofStandards and a Study Group on DepositInsurance Schemes.839
G20At its September meeting the G7 announcedthe creation of the so-called G20 group. This

new forum was initiated with a view tobroadening the informal dialogue amongsystemically significant economies on key

economic and financial policy issues. Boththe EU Presidency and the President of theECB participate in this new forum, in addition
to ministers and central bank governorsfrom the G7 and the following countries:Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, India,
Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, SouthAfrica, South Korea and Turkey. To liaise
effectively with the IMF and the World Bank,
the World Bank President, the IMF ManagingDirector and the Chairmen of the IMFC
and the Development Committee have been
invited to take part as ex officio members ofthe group.The first meeting of the G20 took place inBerlin on 15 and 16 December 1999, underthe chairmanship of Paul Martin, the Finance
Minister of Canada. Ministers and governorsof the G20 discussed the role and objectivesof the new group. They agreed that the G20
provides a useful forum for informal
discussion, while the Bretton Woods
institutions, in particular the IMF, should

remain the decision-making bodies withregard to international monetary and financialissues. Furthermore, they identified the main

issues to be addressed both at the domesticand international levels to reducemacroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities.
In this context, the need for adoptingexchange rate arrangements consistent withdomestic macroeconomic and structural
policies was stressed. Likewise, improvedoverall management of official and privatesector external assets and liabilities was

deemed to be instrumental in reducing
sensitivity to shocks. Moreover, the G20committed itself to demonstrating leadership
in the implementation of codes and standards(see Section 2.3). The next meeting of theG20 ministers and governors will take place
in Canada in autumn 2000.G10 Ministers and GovernorsThe President of the ECB participated in thetwo meetings of the finance ministers and
central bank governors of the G10 countries(Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland,
United Kingdom and United States). Theirmain focus was on the prevention and
management of international financial crises
as well as the involvement of the privatesector in this context (see Section 2.3).At their meeting on 26 September 1999 the
G10 ministers and governors agreed toundertake work on the ongoing process offinancial sector consolidation.G10 Governors and fora related to the Bankfor International Settlements (BIS)The BIS plays an important role in facilitatingco-operation within the central bankingcommunity, with a focus on meetings of theG10 governors, in which the President of the

ECB and the governors of five euro area
NCBs (Belgium, France, Germany, Italy and
the Netherlands) participate. The G10
governors regularly monitor (seven times ayear) monetary and economic developmentsand major trends in international capital
markets. The G10 governors also give
guidance to Committees set up under their
aegis to deal with issues relevant to the
central banking community. ECBrepresentatives take part in the BaselCommittee on Banking Supervision (BCBS),

the Committee on the Global FinancialSystem (CGFS), the Committee on Paymentand Settlement Systems (CPSS), the
Committee on Gold and Foreign Exchange,regular meetings of Central Bank Statisticians,Economists, Internal Auditors and Data Bank
Experts, and all groups established by theseCommittees.On 9 December 1999 the ECB became ashareholder of the BIS by underwriting 3,000shares of the third tranche of the capital of
the BIS, alongside the central banks ofArgentina, Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand.9
84The Organisation for EconomicCo-operation and Development (OECD)Using Protocol No. 1 to the OECDConvention as a legal basis, the SecretaryGeneral of the OECD confirmed in February
1999 that the ECB would be allowed to
participate in the work of the relevant OECDcommittees and working groups as a separatemember of the European Community delegation
alongside the European Commission. The
ECB attended the meetings of the followingcommittees and working groups: the
Economic Policy Committee and its workinggroups (Working Parties 1 and 3 and Short-Term Economic Prospects), the Monetary
Experts™ Meeting, the Economic and
Development Review Committee (EDRC) and
the Financial Markets Committee (FMC). In
the context of its regular country reviewswithin the Economic and DevelopmentReview Committee, the OECD is adjusting
its review process of the euro area in amanner consistent with the new institutional
setting. Euro area countries have agreed in

principle on the examinations of individualeuro area Member States being supplementedby a regular review of euro area developments

and policies within the Economic and
Development Review Committee. Since thepractical arrangements still had to be worked
out, an informal seminar was held to reviewthe common monetary and exchange ratepolicies of the euro area in 1999.2.2The development of bilateral
relations between the ECBand countries outside theEuropean UnionDuring its first year of operation the ECB hasestablished widespread bilateral contacts and
working relations with central banks andother institutions of countries outside the
European Union.Executive Board members visited, inter alia,several countries in Asia in the course of

1999. On these occasions matters of commoninterest and the implications of theintroduction of the euro for the Asian regionwere reviewed.A number of official delegations fromnon-EU countries were received by theExecutive Board at the ECB premises inFrankfurt. In this context, the ECB hosted
the meeting of Asia-Europe Ministers ofFinance (ASEM) on 15 and 16 January 1999.Several high-level representatives from Latin
American countries also visited the ECB inthe course of the year.2.3The architecture of the
international monetary and financial
systemIn accordance with the arrangements regarding
the international representation of theEurosystem, the ECB has taken part in newinitiatives and progress achieved so far in
strengthening the architecture of theinternational monetary and financial system.Since the Mexican crisis in 1994-95 and following
the financial crises that affected the east Asianeconomies in 1997-98, the internationalcommunity has undertaken work to promote
a more stable global capital market. In 1999,against the background of a significantimprovement in the world economic outlook,

further progress was made in implementingalready agreed measures and new initiativeswere agreed.Transparency, codes and standardsThe most visible progress has been achieved
in enhancing the transparency and
accountability of the public and private
sectors. Initiatives in this field aim atimproving the scope and quality of
information to support better private andofficial decision-making, which would enhancefinancial stability. In addition to improving

data collection and disclosure by both thepublic and private sectors, the internationalcommunity has been actively promoting the
development and dissemination of codes andstandards of good practices in various fields.
859
In the area of data transparency, severalinitiatives concern the decision-makingprocess of international institutions. On avoluntary basis, information is now available
on countries™ IMF-supported programmes(Letters of Intent, Policy Framework Papers(PFPs) and, in the future, Poverty Reduction
Strategy Papers (PRSPs), which are thesupporting documents underlying the newlyestablished Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF)), as well as on Article IVsurveillance (Public Information Notices
reflecting the outcome of the IMF Executive
Board discussion). In April 1999 a pilotproject was launched by the IMF Executive
Board to improve transparency further
through the voluntary release of Article IVstaff reports.In order to disclose comprehensive, reliableand consistent data on foreign reserve assetsand liabilities of the official sector, a statistical
template for public dissemination of Data onInternational Reserves and Foreign Currency
Liquidity, under the IMF Special Data
Dissemination Standard (SDDS), has beenagreed jointly by the IMF and the G10 centralbanks. Compliance will be voluntary under
the SDDS and most G10 countries plan orhave already started to report on the newbasis.Improving transparency is also important withregard to the private sector. Several BIS
working groups (see Section 2.1 above) havedeveloped a number of initiatives in this area.In order to improve the quality of BIS
consolidated international banking statistics,the CGFS has agreed to shorten the reportingfrequency from semi-annual to quarterly
as from January 2000. Moreover, credit
exposures towards the ultimate counterpartswill be published in addition to those towards
the immediate counterparts. Under the jointleadership of several groupings (the BCBS,the CGFS, the FSF, the International
Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS),
the International Accounting StandardsCommittee (IASC) and the International
Organisation of Securities Commissions(IOSCO)), several initiatives aim at enhancingdisclosure requirements by individual financialmarket institutions.With regard to the development and
dissemination of standards and codes ofgood practices, a key challenge is theirimplementation by a large number of

developing countries and emerging marketeconomies. Further progress in that area is
expected to contribute significantly to crisis
prevention by improving the institutionalframework for the decision-making processin the official sector, as well as information

provided to market participants for their ownrisk assessment. The international financialcommunity is currently assessing the most

effective way to monitor the observance byindividual countries of internationally agreedcodes and standards.In the context of a pilot project, the IMF, inconjunction with the relevant authorities of
the countries concerned, has embarked ona series of experimental ﬁReports on theObservance of Standards and Codesﬂ
(ROSCs). These reports assess the extent towhich member countries observe certaininternationally recognised standards, focusing
primarily on the areas of direct operationalconcern to the IMF.Following the adoption by the IMF inNovember 1998 of a Code of Good Practices
on Fiscal Transparency (subsequently
amended in April 1999), a Code of GoodPractices on Transparency in Monetary and
Financial Policies was adopted at the IMF
Annual Meetings in September 1999. TheEurosystem was actively involved in the design
of the latter Code, together with the BIS and
a representative group of central banks andother experts. Further work is under way toprepare the supporting documentation to the
Code. The monitoring of compliance withthe Code of Good Practices on Transparencyin Monetary and Financial Policies is expected
to be part of the aforementioned ROSCs.This is already reflected in some of theexperimental reports which have been
compiled by the IMF so far and which havebeen made available on its website. Experts9
86from the Eurosystem took part in thismonitoring activity.Finally, several initiatives have been taken inorder to facilitate the development andimplementation of standards relevant to thefunctioning of financial systems. Under the

aegis of the FSF a Task Force on the
Implementation of Standards was set up inorder to examine ways of fostering the

implementation of international standards and
codes relevant to the strengthening offinancial systems. In the specific area of
banking standards, in June 1999 the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS)released a proposal for a new capital
adequacy framework consisting of threepillars: minimum capital requirements(developing and expanding the 1988
agreement), a supervisory and internal reviewof an institution™s capital adequacy and theeffective use of market discipline. The BCBS
was seeking comments from all interested
parties by March 2000 in order to putforward more definitive proposals later on in

the same year.Strengthening financial sector stabilityEfforts to improve the soundness of financialsystems and of regulatory and supervisoryframeworks have been undertaken by variousinstitutions and fora such as the IMF, the

World Bank and the BCBS.The recently established FSF is expected toenhance the exchange of information and
international co-operation between thecompetent national and international bodies
in financial market supervision, particularlywhere there is a cross-sectoral dimension.
Moreover, two of the working groups set up
by the FSF are expected to formulate policyrecommendations aimed at reducing the riskassociated with unregulated or poorly
regulated segments of financial systems,
namely highly leveraged institutions andoffshore financial centres.While abstaining from conducting an
assessment of countries™ actual adherence to
its Core Principles for Effective BankingSupervision (adopted in 1997), the BCBS
published a document in October 1999 toprovide a methodology for evaluatingcompliance with them. This document will
serve as an input for financial sectorsurveillance by the IMF and the World Bank.
The Financial Sector Liaison Committee
(FSLC) has agreed to co-ordinate a joint IMF/World Bank financial sector monitoring andassessment programme aimed at evaluating

the soundness and vulnerabilities of members™financial systems. The IMF and the WorldBank initiated a Financial Sector Assessment
Program (FSAP), in which joint teams, with
the participation of outside experts from
national supervisory agencies, assess the
vulnerability of national financial sectors,initially for a selected number of countries.In keeping with such missions and on an
experimental basis, the IMF has beenelaborating Financial Sector StabilityAssessments (FSSAs) as background
documentation to its Article IV consultations.Exchange rate regimes and capital accountliberalisationAnother important area subject to ongoinganalysis and discussion is the review ofappropriate exchange rate regimes, as
attempting to maintain unsustainable exchangerate regimes was a major factor behind recentfinancial crises. As emphasised in recent
discussions at the IMF and in other fora, theoptimal exchange rate regime differs fromcountry to country. Moreover, the optimal
exchange rate regime for a country maychange over time, depending on its state ofmacroeconomic and financial development.
It is the Eurosystem™s opinion that fundsurveillance will have to focus on the
consistency of the exchange rate system
chosen by a given country with itsmacroeconomic and structural policies, aswell as its major external trade and financial
links.879
Similarly, further work is needed on capitalaccount liberalisation. While there is a
consensus that liberalisation has the potentialto bring substantial benefits to a country, the
management and sequencing of liberalisationare delicate issues. A sound macroeconomicframework, including consistent monetary
and exchange rate policies, and a strongfinancial infrastructure are crucial in thatrespect. The merits and risks of controls on
capital inflows and outflows, including tax-
based controls on inflows, are still underconsideration. In a connected area, the
FSF Working Group on Capital Flows is
currently considering a range of policyrecommendations in borrower and creditor
countries which could, over time, reduce thevolatility of capital flows and the risks tofinancial systems of excessive short-term
external indebtedness. In this context, theprudent management of external official andprivate debt and, more broadly, of national
balance sheets plays an important role.Crisis management and the involvement ofthe private sectorIn addition to substantially increasing itsfinancial resources to cope with systemiccrises in recent years (including the doubling
of resources callable under the pre-existingGeneral Arrangement to Borrow (GAB) andthe New Arrangement to Borrow (NAB)
from SDR 17 billion to SDR 34 billion in1998 and increasing the IMF quotas bySDR 66 billion in 1999), the IMF has also
developed new instruments with which to
deal with financial crises. In April 1999 theIMF Executive Board approved the
Contingent Credit Line (CCL) facility, whichestablishes a means of providing short-term
financing for countries with sound economic
policies but whose external position is
endangered by international financialcontagion. In order to support adjustment

measures during debt negotiations, the IMFExecutive Board has re-affirmed its policy tolend into sovereign arrears (adopted in 1989)
on a case-by-case basis. It has also beenagreed that the IMF might extend this policy,in principle, to the case of non-sovereignarrears.Further progress is needed in the complexbut crucial area of ensuring private sectorinvolvement in crisis prevention andresolution. Recent financial crises have
highlighted the disruptive effects of changesin market sentiment. Some steps have alreadybeen taken, ranging from ex ante and voluntary

measures (such as the establishment of 
regularcommunication channels between debtorcountries and their private creditors and the
arrangement of private sector contingent
credit lines) to more compulsory schemes(for instance, the Paris Club required a
country to seek comparable treatment from
its bond creditors). Moreover, both the IMFInterim Committee and the G10 ministers

and governors supported the frameworkelaborated in the report by the G7 financeministers to the Cologne Economic Summit

(18 June 1999).2.4The international role of the euro
The introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999was a major event with important implicationsnot only inside but also outside the euro area.
The euro is the second most widely used
currency at the international level, as a result ofboth the legacy of the former nationalcurrencies replaced by the euro and the

economic weight of the euro area in the world
economy. The development of the euro as aninternational currency will mainly be a market-
driven process. In particular, the use of theeuro by private agents as an investment and
financing currency, as well as a payment and
vehicle currency, will play a prominent role.The decisions of private sector agents will beinfluenced to a large extent by the degree of
integration, liquidity and diversification ofthe euro financial markets, and by thecross-border relationships of the euro area.

Moreover, the international role of the eurowill be affected by the economic conditions inthe euro area, thereby highlighting the

contribution of all economic policies to a soundand stable currency.9
88Since the internationalisation of the euro, assuch, is not a policy objective, it will beneither fostered nor hindered by theEurosystem. The orientation of the
Eurosystem™s monetary policy towards pricestability will remain a major factor behindinvestors™ confidence in the euro. Conversely,
the Eurosystem is aware of potentialimplications for the conduct of its monetarypolicy of the internationalisation of the euro.
These potential implications will not beallowed to impair its ability to maintain pricestability.The emergence of the euro area Œ with
characteristics similar to those of the two
other major economic regions, the UnitedStates and Japan, in terms of large size andlow trade openness Œ and the expected

increase of the euro™s international usealso have implications for internationalco-operation.Given its economic weight in the world (morethan one-fifth in terms of GDP), the euro
area is generally expected to play an
important role in the process of internationalco-operation. Fewer players at the globallevel and more balanced relationshipsamong them should, in principle, facilitate

international co-operation, while at the same
time strengthening the awareness of each
player of the need to assume his respective
responsibility. This process is assisted byregular exchanges of views and consultationsamong major economic areas.In addition to adequate representationarrangements (where the ECB is concerned,
see Section 2.1), a more efficient internationalco-operation process and a smaller riskof policy inconsistencies require the euro
area to take a single position wheneverappropriate. This is also supportive of theeuro area exerting an international influence
commensurate with its economic weight andfurther limits the risk for the Eurosystemof being pressed to pursue inappropriate
short-term-oriented policy measures, whichwould undermine longer-term domestic andthereby external stability.899
9
90Chapter VPayment and securitiessettlement systems9
921Oversight of large-value payment systems
Large-value payment systems in euroAs from 4 January 1999 five large-valuepayment systems, all of which comply with
the safety standards laid down in the 1990
G10 Report on Interbank Netting Schemes(the Lamfalussy standards), commencedoperations in euro together with TARGET,
namely the Euro Clearing System (Euro 1)run by the Clearing Company of the EuroBanking Association (EBA), Euro Access
Frankfurt (EAF) in Germany, Système NetProtégé (SNP) in France, Servicio Españolde Pagos Interbancarios (SEPI) in Spain
and Pankkien On-line Pikasiirrot jaSekit-järjestelmä (POPS) in Finland. InApril 1999 SNP was upgraded and converted
into a new ﬁhybridﬂ system called Paris NetSettlement (PNS). Similar to EAF, the newsystem combines features of net and gross
settlement systems.In accordance with the common oversightpolicy stance of the Eurosystem, the NCBs
are responsible for the oversight of thesystems located in their respective countries,
whereas the ECB is responsible for theoversight of Euro 1. Within this framework,
the ECB in particular monitored the daily
settlement process of Euro 1 and closelyfollowed the more general development ofthe EBA. The latter was characterised by,
inter alia, an increase in the number ofclearing banks from 62 (in January 1999) to72 (in December 1999). In addition to its

oversight activity, the ECB played a twofoldrole in respect of Euro 1: it acted as thesettlement service provider and as the holderof a liquidity pool, established in order toensure timely settlement in the event of the
failure of a participant.As part of their ongoing oversight functions,the ECB and the NCBs regularly collectedand reviewed relevant statistical datapertaining to the main large-value payment
systems in euro. These data provide valuableinformation on the smooth functioning anddevelopment of the different systems.Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS)In 1997 a group of major foreign exchange (FX)trading banks established Continuous Linked
Settlement Services Ltd. (CLSS) in London. Theobjective of CLSS is to provide multi-currencyservices for the simultaneous settlement of both
legs of foreign exchange transactions, whereby,through implementation of a payment versuspayment mechanism, foreign exchange
settlement risk will be largely eliminated. Thesystem will be operated by Continuous LinkedSettlement Bank (CLSB), New York, a wholly-
owned subsidiary of CLSS. CLSB is due tobecome operational in 2001. Owing to the factthat the intention is for the euro to become

one of the first currencies that the CLSB will
settle, the Eurosystem is involved in theoversight of the system. In the course of 1999
the Eurosystem focused in particular on
evaluating the impact of the CLSB on theliquidity situation in euro area large-value
payment systems and, in order to exchangeviews on this issue, sponsored a meeting withthe euro area banks involved in the project.2Oversight of retail payment systems
Cross-border retail payment servicesEfficient cross-border retail payment servicesare essential for the smooth functioning ofthe Single Market and full exploitation of its
benefits by citizens and businesses alike.However, the service level in the area ofcross-border retail payments is still
unsatisfactory, in terms of both the speed of
execution and the charges levied oncustomers. Improvements in banks™ practices
should follow from the implementation of
939
the European Parliament and CouncilDirective No. 97/5/EC of 27 January 1997 oncross-border credit transfers. However, theimplementation of the Directive may not be
sufficient. Being a legal instrument, it couldnot fully address the issues of inadequacies in
infrastructure and standardisation, which

currently represent a major source of costs.Against this background, the ECB published a
report entitled ﬁImproving cross-border
retail payment services in the euro area Œthe Eurosystem™s viewﬂ in September 1999which analysed the current situation and
defined the Eurosystem™s policy line.After having discussed several options, the
Eurosystem took the view that its operationalinvolvement would not be justified at present.It intends rather to become a catalyst for
change, initiating regular discussions with thebanking and payment service industry in orderto facilitate euro area agreements which will
improve the environment for cross-borderretail transfers, in particular in the area ofstandardisation. In order to launch the

discussion and to give a clear signal to themarkets, the Eurosystem defined a set ofobjectives which the industry should fulfil by
the time the euro banknotes and coins areintroduced. These objectives are aimed
both at inviting the industry to make the
investment needed in order to bring theefficiency level of cross-border retail
payments closer to that of domestic payment
systems and at endeavouring to strike abalance between what is expected by usersand what the industry can realistically deliver
in the short run.One indication that the markets are startingto address the problem is the EBA™sLow-Value Payments (LVP) initiative, whichis aimed at developing a service for the
processing of cross-border retail paymentsin euro and would, in the early stages, bebased on the technical capabilities of Euro 1.
The system is scheduled to becomeoperational in the second half of 2000.Electronic moneyAlthough electronic money is still in itsinfancy and growth has been very modest to
date, the possibility of exponential growthcannot be ruled out. Hence electronicmoney has the potential to have significant
implications for monetary policy in the future.
A number of additional regulatory concerns,i.e. the safe and efficient functioning of
payment systems and confidence in paymentinstruments, the protection of customers andmerchants, the stability of financial markets,

protection against criminal abuse and levelplaying-field considerations, have also to be
taken into account. For these reasons,

clear rules on the conditions under whichelectronic money can be issued need to be
established.The European Commission and the EUCouncil are preparing Directives on the
taking-up, pursuit and prudential supervisionof the business of electronic moneyinstitutions and on amending Council
Directive No. 77/780/EEC of 12 December1977 on the co-ordination of the laws,regulations and administrative provisions

relating to the taking-up and pursuit of thebusiness of credit institutions. The ECB
has actively contributed to this work in
accordance with its policy line defined in theﬁReport on electronic moneyﬂ (August 1998)and provided a formal opinion on the above-
mentioned draft Directives in January 1999.Inter alia, the ECB highlighted the fact that itis strongly in favour of all electronic money
issuers being classified as credit institutions,as well as of a redeemability requirementbeing imposed on them. Whereas the draft
Directives take into account many of theconcerns of the Eurosystem, these majorissues which have yet to be resolved will
be discussed further with the EuropeanParliament, to which the draft Directives have
been submitted for a second reading in
accordance with the co-decision procedure.9
943Other payment systems activities
In February 1999 the ECB published anaddendum, incorporating 1997 data, to the

descriptive guide to the payment andsecurities settlement systems operatingin the EU Member States, the ﬁBlue

Bookﬂ. Moreover, in order to providecomprehensive information on the majorpayment and securities settlement systems in

the EU accession countries, the ECB releaseda report in August 1999 entitled ﬁPayment
systems in countries that have applied for
membership of the European Unionﬂ. This
publication was prepared in co-operationwith the central banks of Bulgaria, Cyprus,the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,

Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia andSlovenia. It marks an important milestone in
the deepening of co-operation with the
central banks of these countries in the fieldof payment systems.4Securities settlement systems policy
Assessment of EU securities settlement
systems and their links
Following the publication of the reportentitled ﬁStandards for the use of EU
securities settlement systems in ESCB credit
operationsﬂ and the first assessment of the
EU securities settlement systems (SSSs) in
1998, SSSs have made substantial efforts toenhance the level of their compliance withthe standards and, as a result, the
preconditions for their use have beenreduced in many cases. The assessment ofSSSs was updated in May 1999 and the result
showed that there are now five SSSs in theeuro area which can be used withoutpreconditions, compared with one at the
start of Stage Three of EMU. A further tenSSSs have improved their level of compliancesubstantially. The eligibility of SSSs will be
reviewed periodically in order to take newdevelopments into account.Some of the EU SSSs have built linksbetween themselves in order to enable thecross-border transfer of securities in general.
Before these links can be used in the context
of the single monetary policy of theEurosystem and the ESCB™s intraday credit
operations, they have to be assessed againstthe standards for the use of EU SSSs. Afterthese assessments were carried out in 1999,
the Governing Council agreed that a numberof links between SSSs were eligible for the
cross-border transfer of collateral used in
the Eurosystem™s monetary policy operations
and the intraday credit operations of theESCB. In May, after a first wave ofassessments, 26 links were deemed to comply
with the ECB™s standards. After a secondwave of assessments in October, the
Governing Council agreed that a further
21 links were eligible. Thus, in addition to
the correspondent central banking model(CCBM), which was established by the
Eurosystem, there are now marketalternatives available in some countries forthe cross-border transfer of collateral. For
the time being, the links are eligible to beused on a free-of-payment (FOP) basis, as
currently no delivery versus payment (DVP)
facilities exist on a cross-border basis. Furtherlinks were assessed and approved by theGoverning Council in February 2000.The cross-border transfer of securitiesThe CCBM was established as an interimsolution to the cross-border use of collateral
in the Eurosystem™s monetary policyoperations and the intraday credit operationsof the ESCB until the private sector develops

more comprehensive solutions for thecross-border use of securities in general.Increasingly, the cross-border transfer of

securities in general has become an importantissue for the private market, which is trying959
to develop not only links, but also furthermarket solutions to facilitate transfers across
borders. Within the euro area, marketparticipants tend to be in favour of a more
efficient and integrated securities settlementinfrastructure. Several projects are beingimplemented in competition with one
another; however, the position of the
Eurosystem remains neutral in this respect.
The Eurosystem will try to ensure that all
proposed alternatives offer a degree of safetywhich is compatible with the standards setfor the collateralisation of the single monetary
policy of the Eurosystem and ESCB intradaycredit operations.Infrastructural barriers to the integration ofthe euro area repo marketThe Eurosystem has a keen interest in the
smooth functioning of the euro area financialmarkets, in particular with a view to ensuringthe transmission of its monetary policyimpulses. In this context, studies carried outby the Eurosystem have shown that, unlike
the uncollateralised money market, thecollateralised money market is not integratedthroughout the euro area. One of the issues

analysed related to the existing infrastructuralbarriers to integration, in particular thesecurities settlement aspects. The potential
barriers to further integration in this areaare the lack of cross-border settlementprocedures based on a delivery versus
payment mechanism and the different legalframeworks, which are tailored to the needsof the domestic markets. It is clear that the
Eurosystem has a role to play in increasingawareness of these problems. Initiatives tofind solutions must, however, come primarily
from the market.9
96Chapter VIFinancial stability andprudential supervision9
981The institutional framework for financial stability
The institutional framework for financialstability in the EU and in the euro area is

based on national competence andinternational co-operation. A variety ofnational structures and practices thus
contribute, within the harmonised regulatoryframework defined by the Treaty establishingthe European Community (Treaty) and the

EC Directives, to the pursuance of financial
stability objectives.
The Treaty provides the instruments neededin Stage Three of Economic and MonetaryUnion (EMU) to link the jurisdiction of the
single monetary policy (i.e. the euro area)with those of national supervisory policies(domestically chartered institutions). First,
the Eurosystem is to ﬁcontribute to thesmooth conduct of policies pursued bycompetent authorities relating to the
prudential supervision of credit institutionsand the stability of the financial systemﬂ
(Article 105 (5) of the Treaty). Second, the
ECB is accorded an advisory function in the
regulatory process (Article 105 (4) of theTreaty and Article 25.1 of the Statute of
the ESCB). These provisions reflect theinterest of the Eurosystem, as the central
bank of the euro area, in the maintenance
of the stability of the financial system.The Banking Supervision Committee (BSC), agroup of high-ranking representatives ofcentral banks and banking supervisoryauthorities, is the main body which assists
the Eurosystem in the fulfilment of
its above-mentioned tasks. AlthoughArticle 105 (5) of the Treaty applies only to
participating countries, the co-operationwithin the BSC involves all central banks andsupervisory authorities of the 15 Member

States. At the same time, the BSC may alsoact as a forum for consultations among
EU banking supervisors on issues not related

to the supervisory tasks of the Eurosystem.In the accomplishment of this twofold
mandate, it contributes to ensure the ability
of both NCBs and supervisory authorities toco-operate across national borders, wheneverneeded. The arrangements currently in placecan be described by looking at co-ordination
mechanisms: (i) within the Eurosystem,(ii) between supervisors and the Eurosystemand (iii) among supervisory authorities.Co-ordination mechanisms are primarilycalled for within the Eurosystem. This is thecase for emergency liquidity assistance (ELA),which embraces the support given by centralbanks in exceptional circumstances and on a
case-by-case basis to temporarily illiquidinstitutions and markets. At the outset, it isnecessary to stress that the importance of
ELA should not be overemphasised. Centralbank support should not be seen as a primarymeans for ensuring financial stability, since it
bears the risk of moral hazard. Preventivemeasures aimed at fostering the adoption ofsound risk management practices on the part
of financial institutions, and the effectiveness
of prudential regulation and supervision inachieving this goal, are the first line of defence
against excessive risk-taking behaviour andfinancial distress. Furthermore, the provision
of ELA has been a very rare event in industrial

countries over the past few decades, whileother elements of the safety net have gainedimportance in the management of crises.
However, if and when appropriate, thenecessary mechanisms to tackle a financialcrisis are in place. The main guiding principle

is that the competent NCB takes the decisionconcerning the provision of ELA to aninstitution operating in its jurisdiction. This
would take place under the responsibility andat the cost of the NCB in question.Mechanisms ensuring an adequate flow of

information are in place in order that anypotential liquidity impact can be managed in amanner consistent with the maintenance of
the appropriate single monetary policy stance.The agreement on ELA is internal to theEurosystem and therefore does not affect
the existing arrangements between centralbanks and supervisors at the national level orbilateral and multilateral co-operation among
supervisors and between the latter andthe Eurosystem. However, their smooth999
functioning assumes an ability to implement,swiftly and efficiently, co-ordinationmechanisms aimed at dealing with thecross-border implications of financial crises

and at preventing contagion.As far as co-operation between the Eurosystemand the supervisory authorities of the EU countries
is concerned, the BSC is the major forum foraddressing relevant issues. In assisting the

Eurosystem with prudential supervision andfinancial stability issues, it examines mattersof a macro-prudential nature, reviews
developments in the banking and financialsystems and promotes a smooth exchange ofinformation between the Eurosystem and
banking and other supervisory authorities. Thisfunction of the BSC is aimed at providing theco-ordination needed between central banking
and banking supervision. In particular, the
BSC serves as a channel for conveying usefulinformation to the supervisory authorities on
credit institutions which the ECB and the NCBsmight gain from the performance of their basictasks in the field of monetary policy and payment
and securities settlement systems. At the same
time, it allows the reverse flow of informationfrom supervisory authorities to the Eurosystem

to be managed. In particular, in the light ofpossible systemic implications, supervisors areprepared to inform the Eurosystem as soon as
any major problems in the banking system arise.As a matter of principle, the BSC is in a positionto address all the relevant issues, since, at the
Community level, the post-BCCI Directive has
removed legal impediments to the flow ofconfidential information between supervisory
agencies and the central banks, including theECB and the Eurosystem. By relying on existingarrangements at the national level, the flow of

information between the supervisory agenciesand the Eurosystem is, as a rule, channelled
through the respective NCBs.Co-operation between national authorities in the
field of prudential supervision is based on

both bilateral and 
multilateral arrangements.Bilateral co-operation between home andhost country authorities has been significantlystrengthened in all sectors of financial activity.The network of memoranda of understandingimplemented in the European Economic Area(EEA) in the banking sector is an expression
of the effort to sharpen the channels for theexchange of information and to facilitate the
supervision of cross-border activities. The

memoranda of understanding typically coverpractical provisions governing establishmentprocedures, facilitating cross-border
examinations of branches and enhancing theexchange of information in respect ofsubsidiaries. Multilateral co-operation in the
field of prudential supervision within thevarious sectors of financial activity is also
well established through the operation of
several committees. In the banking sector,besides the second function of the BSC, theGroupe de Contact has been operating since
1972. This group functions as a forum formultilateral co-operation and the exchangeof information at the EEA level on issues
relating to the implementation of banking
regulation and supervisory practices, includingthe discussion of individual cases. In the
securities sector, the Forum of European
Securities Commissions (FESCO) wasestablished in 1997 to foster multilateral co-
operation among the securities commissionsat the EEA level. The Conference ofInsurance Supervisory Authorities fulfils
similar functions in respect of the insurancesector.All in all, the integration of the banking andfinancial system within the EU has beenachieved through reliance on an institutional
framework based on national competenceand co-operation. The single monetary policyand the accelerated integration of banking
and financial markets in the euro area haveincreased the importance of co-operationwithin the Eurosystem, between supervisory
authorities and the Eurosystem, aswell as among supervisors. The necessary
arrangements to facilitate the exchange of
information and to implement commonlyagreed policy actions to tackle threats to
financial stability are in place.9
1002Structural changes in the EU banking and financial sector
The monitoring of structural changes takingplace in the euro area and EU banking and
financial markets is relevant both to the needsof the Eurosystem, as the central bank forthe euro area, and to the national supervisory
policies. Since the introduction of the euro,these changes have gained momentum,fostering the re-organisation of the financial
services industry. The potential specificeffects of the introduction of the euro on EU
banks have been examined extensively by the
BSC.1An important driving force for change is
information and communication technology.2This contributes to reducing the costs
associated with the collection, storage,
processing and transmission of information,by replacing paper-based and labour-intensivemethods with automated processes. Second,
it modifies the ways in which customers haveaccess to banking services and products,mainly through automated channels, viz.
telephone, personal computer and internetbanking (ﬁremote bankingﬂ). Both effects alterthe nature of competition in banking and
potentially affect the latitude of the marketfor banking services, also broadening the setof potential entrants. Financial institutions are
in different ways responding to, and at thesame time further strengthening, these andother changes in the market structures. In
general, large institutions are repositioningthemselves in the new market by adding newactivities and/or expanding geographically.
This is deemed necessary in order for themto be able to continue to serve the marketfor wholesale activities. This repositioning has
led to an increase in mergers and acquisitionsinvolving large European financial institutions.However, only a few cross-border mergers
and acquisitions have taken place.Different market dynamics are drivingchanges within small institutions. The fixedcosts associated with investments ininformation and communication technology
have increased the relevance of economiesof scale. A significant number of smallEuropean institutions have been involved indomestic mergers and acquisitions. In some

EU countries savings and co-operative
banks have further intensified the mutual
co-operation within their groups, either

through specific co-operation agreements orby setting up joint venture institutions toprovide asset management and securities
clearing facilities. The downsizing effect onbanking capacity in Europe Œ measured as
the number of branches and number of

employees Œ has as yet proved largelyinsubstantial. However, rationalisation of the
organisational structures and significant
improvements in efficiency are generallyvisible only with a time-lag.
Banks, both large and small, are also adopting
strategies to respond to the process ofdisintermediation, whereby an increasing
number of financial services are provided bymeans of direct market intermediation or bynon-bank financial institutions. Banks are
expanding into the asset managementbusiness in order to contain the
disintermediation of traditional banking

products. This is mainly evident in the
following: (i) an increased involvement inservices for securities trading, (ii) custody
and, most frequently, (iii) the establishmentof subsidiaries to manage investment funds.
In any event, the effect is quite visible in
banks™ income statements, which show a shift
from interest to non-interest income. The
analysis conducted by the BSC3 shows that in
the EU non-interest income has been the
most dynamic component in the banks™income structure in recent years and its
relative importance (as a percentage of thetotal operating income) has been constantlyincreasing. Notwithstanding the increased
costs associated with the development ofnon-traditional activities, the increase innon-interest income also seems to have had1ﬁPossible effects of EMU on the EU banking systems in the
medium to long termﬂ, ECB, February 1999.2ﬁThe effects of technology on the EU banking systemsﬂ, ECB,
July 1999.3ﬁEU banks™ income structureﬂ, ECB, April 2000.
1019
a positive effect on EU banks™ profitability inrecent years, largely compensating for theshrinkage in income margins from traditionalbanking activities. The composition of
non-interest income across the EU bankingsystems is somewhat heterogeneous; feesand commissions represent the main
sub-component, accounting for around 60%of total non-interest income.On the whole, the reorganisation of thebanking and financial industry has occurredmainly within national borders, and therelevance of cross-border activity is still
limited, especially in the supply of retailservices. However, common trends are at
work in the euro area and EU countries. Theswift establishment of a single money marketand the accelerated integration of capital
markets after the introduction of the eurohighlight the fact that financial intermediariesand markets are increasingly exposed to
shocks originating beyond national borders.3Macro-prudential analysis
macro-prudential analysis carried out within
the BSC focuses on the banking sector at the
EU/euro area level. It integrates with otheractivities carried out within the Eurosystemin the fields of the oversight of payment and

securities settlement systems, the surveillance
of money and capital markets relevant tothe conduct of monetary policy and the
monitoring of international financial markets.The analysis put forward in these differentcontexts further enhances the Eurosystem™s
instruments for contributing to thesafeguarding of financial stability.In 1999 ad hoc investigations were carriedout on two topics: the credit exposures of
EU banks to emerging and developing
countries and the possible implications ofadjustments in asset prices for the stability ofthe banking sector. With regard to the first
issue, it was found that the EU banking sectorhas continued to reinforce its position as thelargest group of international lenders to
emerging and developing countries. However,since the exposures to the riskiest countrieshave been relatively limited, banks have made
significant risk provisions and the generaleconomic situation in these countries hasimproved, the assessment of the risks to EU
banking systems became more positive during1999. With regard to the second issue, the
prolonged rise in most EU stock prices,
together with the rapid increases registeredin some EU countries™ real estate prices,The BSC has started to analyse the soundnessof the banking and financial sector at the EU/
euro area level on the basis of a commonlyagreed body of information. This work isreferred to as macro-prudential analysis. In
addition, other international organisations arecurrently developing this field of analysis, inorder to sharpen the instruments for
comprehending the reasons for the severefinancial turbulence which has recently taken
place. A key component in this work has

been the development of reliable data sourcesfor understanding the vulnerabilities in the
financial systems of both developed and
developing countries.The framework for macro-prudential analysisrelies on a number of indicators based on
aggregated banking system data obtainedfrom central bank and supervisory sources,
and on the data on the macroeconomic andfinancial environment relevant to assessingthe soundness of the banking sector. These
indicators aim at capturing significant build-ups of risk exposure within the bankingsystem, potential disturbances emerging from
outside the banking system, and channels ofcontagion through which difficulties at oneinstitution could spread to others. The
techniques used involve systematic andregular analysis on the basis of quantitative
indicators and an interpretative input that
relies on the information and insightsobtained from the supervisory process. The9
102indicated the need for increasing  attention
on the part of national supervisoryauthorities. In this regard, some national4ﬁAsset prices and banking stabilityﬂ, ECB, April 2000.
5See also Chapter IV.
authorities have taken special action to
increase awareness of the risks and ensurethat banks are not overly exposed.44Risk assessment systems and credit registers
In addition to the collection of informationon market developments and threats to
banking and financial stability, the
implementation of preventive measures at the
national level is enhanced by co-operation

on, and the exchange of information withregard to, supervisory practices. Riskassessment systems are tools commonly used
in this regard.Supervisory risk assessment systemscomprise all formalised and structuredsystems and operations employed by bankingsupervisors to identify, at an early stage,
credit institutions which display high orincreasing risk or weak controls.Notwithstanding their national orientation Œ
given that they are geared to the specific
features and needs of national banking
systems Œ supervisory risk assessment
systems share many similarities across theEU. The efforts undertaken in this field bythe BSC have mainly entailed the analysis of
systems in operation or in the process ofbeing developed by banking supervisoryauthorities and the NCBs in several Member
States. Contacts have extended beyond the
EU, since an analysis of the systems used bythe Canadian Deposit Insurance Corporation
and by the US Federal Reserve was also made
and presented to the EU supervisoryauthorities and NCBs represented in theBSC.Although they are mainly intended to assistcredit risk management by financial
institutions, credit registers may also be usedas a supervisory tool. Information-sharingamong national authorities in the field of
central credit registers (CCRs) currently inoperation has also intensified. Despite thelegal obstacles which some EU countries are
facing and which, for the time being, do not
allow a cross-border exchange of information
among CCRs for commercial banks™ use, all
technical and operational problems associatedwith a possible opening-up are being tackledwithin the BSC. The debate on restructuring
the international financial architecture in the
light of the lessons learned from the recent
crises has flagged the need for extended
co-operation in also monitoring exposuresof systemic relevance on a cross-borderbasis.5 The positive and negative aspects of
the establishment of an international credit
register have been examined. Additional workis being carried out to explore the feasibility
of a euro area credit register.1039
9
104Chapter VIIThe productionof the euro banknotes and preparations for the
 cash changeover
9
1061Production of the euro banknotes
The euro banknotes and their individualcomponents are being produced in different
European countries by the NCBs and byprivately and publicly owned companies.Production of the euro banknotes started in
July 1999 after the successful completion of
the printing of a pilot series. Before the endof the year printing had started in 9 of the 11
printing works involved in euro banknoteproduction. The later start of production atsome printing works is due either to the
volume of euro banknotes they need to print,or to the production requirements fornational banknotes.
For the time being, the denominations whichwill be produced in the largest volumes are
being printed first. By 1 January 2002 around13 billion euro banknotes will have beenprinted for the 11 participating countries:9 billion banknotes to replace national
banknotes and 4 billion banknotes as logisticalstocks (see Table 10). The nominal value ofthese banknotes amounts to approximately
600 billion. The estimates of the number ofeuro banknotes to be printed before thelaunch will be updated annually, in order to
take account of possible changes in thedemand for the banknotes.The security procedures relating to theproduction and transportation of banknotes
and individual components have been
reviewed and consolidated. A set of
obligatory rules has been developed to ensurea common minimum level of security at the

various production facilities.2The quality of the euro banknotes and coins
Quality of the banknotesProducing banknotes to the same qualitystandards at 11 printing works Œ using rawmaterials from different suppliers Œ is a

demanding task. It is imperative to ensureidentical appearance and consistentperformance in both banknote-sorting and
banknote-accepting machines, in line withbest practice in the production of nationalbanknotes. For this purpose, well-defined
inspection and quality control procedureshave been established.All printing works involved in the productionof the euro banknotes have implemented acommon quality management system, based
on ISO standards.1 The structure of this
common system focuses on the quality of theindividual banknotes. Detailed procedures for
inspection and testing have been defined inorder to evaluate fulfilment of therequirements; these were tested during the
production of the pilot series.The proper implementation and applicationof the quality management system is being

assessed by the ECB on the basis of detailed
monthly reports prepared by the printingworks and audits conducted at the
production sites.Quality of the coinsThe euro coins are produced in 10 countries by14 different mints. In June 1999 the EU financeministers, the mints and the ECB agreed on adetailed quality management system to ensure a
high and uniform quality of euro coins. Eachmint is responsible for the quality of its owncoins in accordance with common rules. The
ECB acts as an independent assessor. Itevaluates the monthly quality reports on thecoins produced and conducts visits to the mints.
The ECB would immediately alert the financeministers if any quality-related problems wereto occur.1ISO 9002: 1994.
1079
3Protecting the euro banknotes and coins against counterfeiting
Since the decision of the Governing Councilof the ECB to establish a database at the ECB
to store all the technical and statistical dataon counterfeit euro banknotes and coins, the
planning process for the counterfeit
monitoring system (CMS), comprising thedatabase itself, the tools needed to exploit itand the links to the various users, has
progressed. The user requirements have been
established and will form the basis for furtherwork. An outline of the technical architecture
of the CMS has been elaborated and
preparatory work for the development ofthe functional analysis has started.In November 1999 the ECB published theﬁReport on the legal protection of banknotes
in the EU Member Statesﬂ. The report is theresult of a careful study and assessment ofthe various aspects of the legal regime forthe protection of the euro banknotes. Theseinclude counterfeiting; copyright protection;
anti-copying devices for reproductionequipment; the adoption and publication of
euro banknote designs; the exchange of
damaged or worn euro banknotes; thewithdrawal of euro banknotes; the issuanceof banknotes by entities other than the ECB

and the NCBs; and the issuance of non-legaltender banknotes, known as ﬁfancyﬂbanknotes.Contacts with Europol, Interpol and theEuropean Commission have been either
established or intensified with a view tomaking the appropriate communication andcollaboration arrangements which will be
crucial to ensuring the effective flow
of information in connection with theprevention and combating of counterfeiting.4The EURO 2002 campaign
The Governing Council selected a global
communications group to assist in conductingan information campaign in preparation forthe introduction of the euro banknotes
and coins on 1 January 2002. Each NCBwill be the key interlocutor of the globalcommunications group at the national level.
The main goals of the EURO 2002 campaign
are:to educate the general public and, more

specifically, the different target groups in
how to recognise genuine euro banknotes;to train shop and bank cashiers how to

examine euro banknotes fast and efficiently
in order to detect possible counterfeits;to ensure favourable reception of the euro
banknotes and coins; andto gradually prepare the general public as

a whole for the introduction of the euro
banknotes and coins by repeatedly drawingattention to their designs.In this context, the term ﬁgeneral publicﬂ isused to refer not only to the residentpopulation of the euro area, but also to

citizens of other countries in which the euro
banknotes will circulate, as well as to visitorsto the euro area countries. The campaign
will be co-ordinated with the European
Commission and the euro area MemberStates, as well as with Greece.9
1085The changeover to the euro banknotes and coins in 2002
Changeover frameworkWith a view to ensuring a successful andsmooth operation, the logistics of the 2002
cash changeover need to be clearly determined
well in advance so that all those concerned canstart the necessary preparations in a timely
manner. During the second half of 1999 there
were intensive discussions among all thoseconcerned, which allowed ministers representedin the ECOFIN Council Œ in close co-operation
with the NCBs and in line with the viewsexpressed by the ECB Œ to reach a consensuson the outline of the cash changeover. This is as
follows:Member States will make their best efforts
to ensure that the bulk of cash transactionscan be made in euro within a fortnight of1 January 2002.Participating Member States consider that
the period of dual circulation of the oldand new banknotes and coins should ideally
last between four weeks and two months.Member States may facilitate the exchangeof old banknotes and coins after this
period.In order to provide for a sufficient quantity
for circulation in the first few days of

January 2002, it would be helpful iffinancial institutions and certain other
groups, notably cash-in-transit companies
and retailers, were provided withbanknotes and coins some time before1 January 2002. Member States recall

that such frontloading must not lead toputting euro banknotes and coins intocirculation before 1 January 2002.In order to help citizens familiarisethemselves with the new coins and to
facilitate the changeover, Member States
agree that making limited quantities ofcoins available to the public on request,notably to the vulnerable groups of the
population, can be envisaged, but not
before the second half of December 2001.This framework allows Member States toimplement the cash changeover in theway which best suits the circumstancesprevailing in each country.
FrontloadingThe need and the lead time for frontloadingeuro banknotes and coins to banks prior to
1 January 2002 Œ and, in principle, throughthe latter to certain other target groups Œgreatly depends on the national changeover
scenario chosen, as well as on the national
logistical infrastructure. As a generalprinciple, any frontloading should be carried

out ﬁas late as possible and as early as
necessaryﬂ. In accordance with this, theGoverning Council has agreed on the
principle of harmonised earliest delivery datesfor supplying relevant target groups with eurobanknotes and coins prior to E-day. Each
NCB would be free to operate within themaximum lead time in order to meet thedomestic needs of frontloading.With regard to the different target groups,all participating countries acknowledge the
need to supply commercial banks with botheuro banknotes and euro coins prior toE-day. This will be a prerequisite for a smooth
and rapid changeover. In addition, there is aconsensus on the need to supply the retailsector, or parts thereof, with euro coins via
the banks prior to E-day (sub-frontloading).This stems from the fact that, unlikebanknotes, coins are generally brought into

active circulation by the retail sector, ratherthan by banks. In other words, the retail
sector will need to have sufficient amounts
of euro coins available, from the very firstday of circulation, to be given as change forthe banknotes which consumers will
have withdrawn from automated tellermachines (ATMs) and over bank counters.Frontloading, as mentioned above, would
help to contribute to the importantrequirement of completing the changeoverprocess within a relatively short period of
time.1099
In accordance with the common statementissued by the ECOFIN Council, severalMember States are considering frontloadingcoins to citizens in the second half of

December 2001. As for the euro banknotes,the Governing Council holds the view thatthe possibility of frontloading to the general
public is excluded by Articles 10 and 11 of
Council Regulation (EC) No. 974/98 on theintroduction of the euro, since it would have
the same effect as putting them into
circulation.Adaptation of ATMs, currency sorting andaccepting machinesA considerable number of euro banknotescan be expected to be distributed via ATMs
or paid in via cash-in machines. In addition,consumers will be interested from the outsetin using euro banknotes and coins to pay for
goods and services available from all types ofvending machines. Finally, the banks and the
cash-in-transit industry will require countingand sorting equipment which is capable ofprocessing the euro banknotes and coinsreliably and securely as soon as they are putinto circulation.It should, therefore, be clear that theadaptation of the relevant machines will be
of crucial importance to ensuring a smoothintroduction of the euro banknotes and coins
in 2002.Related discussions with the relevant industryand its associations began some years ago.
These discussions focused on the question ofthe timely availability of information on
the technical specifications for the euro
banknotes and coins and on their availabilityfor the development and testing of therequired sensors and other devices.The relevant industry will have theopportunity to test their sensors and other
equipment with euro banknotes in 2000 at acentral location provided by the ECB, and in
2001 under a decentralised scheme.26Cash circulation before 2002
On 1 January 1999 the national currency units
became sub-units of the euro. However, theeuro banknotes and coins will not be issueduntil 1 January 2002. In the meantime the

banknote circulation in the euro area consistsof national monetary tokens. The ECBauthorises the issue of the national banknotes
and the volume of coin issuance. During thetransitional period, to ensure substitutability
between the national currency units, the
exchange of banknotes denominated in thenational currencies of the euro area will be
governed by Article 52 of the Statute of the
ESCB, which reads as follows:ﬁFollowing the irrevocable fixing of exchange
rates, the Governing Council shall take thenecessary measures to ensure that banknotesdenominated in currencies with irrevocably

fixed exchange rates are exchanged by the
NCBs at their respective par values.ﬂAgainst this background, the GoverningCouncil has decided that the NCBs shall, atleast in one location in the national territory,by themselves or through their appointed
agent, ensure that banknotes of otherparticipating Member States can be eitherexchanged against national banknotes and
coins or, upon request, credited to anaccount with the institution effecting theexchange, if the national legislation provides
for such possibility, in both cases at theirrespective par value. The NCBs may limit thenumber and/or the total value of the

banknotes they are prepared to accept for
any given transaction or on any one day.2With regard to the euro coins, the industry has the possibility to
conduct tests in test centres established by Member States for
that purpose.9
110In accordance with the above, some 500 NCBbranches throughout the euro area have been
involved in the exchange of non-national euro
area banknotes. From a practical point of

view, the exchange within the framework ofArticle 52 ran smoothly in all the participatingMember States in 1999.In addition, the NCBs may repatriate thebanknotes of other participating countries or
appoint an agent to perform this repatriation
service on their behalf or use existingcommercial repatriation channels.Banknotes repatriated to their respectiveissuing countries were worth a total value
of 6.2 billion and amounted to115.7 million banknotes in total. Thehighest amounts (in terms of value) were
denominated in Italian lire (1.7 billion),Dutch guilders (1.1 billion) and Austrianschillings (0.8 billion).Table 10Quantity of euro banknotes to beproduced by 1 January 2002(1999 estimates, in millions of banknotes)Belgium530
Germany4,030

Spain1,925
France2,585
Ireland180

Italy1,950
Luxembourg45
Netherlands605

Austria520
Portugal450
Finland170
EU-11 TOTAL12,990
1119
9
112Chapter VIIIDevelopment of the
statistical framework9
114The main focus of the ECB™s statistical work,carried out in close co-operation with the
NCBs which collect data from reportingagents, is the production and further
development of statistics covering the euro
area, in order to support the conduct of thesingle monetary policy of the Eurosystem as
required by the Treaty establishing theEuropean Community (Treaty).Money and banking statistics, interest ratesand securities issuesThe ECB published the first data relating tothe consolidated balance sheet of the

Monetary Financial Institutions (MFI) sector,and the monetary statistics drawn from it, in
December 1998. Such data have been
published each month since, within a monthof the reporting date. The statistics weredeveloped further in the course of 1999. In
March 1999 (with regard to February data)
growth in the monetary aggregates wascalculated for the first time from flows, that

is after adjustment for reclassifications,revaluations and other changes which do notarise from transactions; the growth rates had
previously been calculated from levelsoutstanding. Changes in the consolidated MFIbalance sheet in the form of flows became
available at the same time. With effect fromthe publication of monetary statistics for May1999 in late June, the three monetary
aggregates (M1, M2 and M3) have beenavailable in a provisional seasonally adjusted
form. The balance sheet data are also used
to calculate credit institutions™ requiredholdings of minimum reserves.MFIs report more detailed informationquarterly, as a sectoral, currency and maturityanalysis of their business, with some
additional information on the type of lending.
Limited quarterly data were first published in
the April 1999 issue of the ECB Monthly

Bulletin. These have since been extended incoverage, and now include some backdata.The ﬁList of MFIsﬂ is updated monthly and ispublished on the ECB™s website; therequirement is to maintain a consistentapplication of the definition of an MFI acrossthe euro area (and indeed the EuropeanUnion).The ECB published data on debt securitiesissued for the first time in November 1999.
These data relate to new issues, redemptionsand net issues by residents of the euro area,in euro and in other currencies separately,
and to issues denominated in euro by non-residents of the euro area, together with
amounts outstanding.Since the beginning of 1999 the ECB has alsopublished a range of money market interest
rates and government bond yields in the euro
area, as well as various interest rates
representing the rates paid by MFIs on
deposits and charged on loans in their retailbusiness. Retail banking markets remainrather fragmented in the euro area. The data
from which these rates are compiled are notyet fully comparable across the euro area,and the results should be used primarily to
analyse developments in retail interest rates
over time, rather than levels.Work began in 1999 on improving the
comparability of retail interest rate statistics;this may take some time and should be kept
in step with the probable growing integrationof retail financial markets in the euro area.Similar improvements to securities issues
statistics will also be necessary.Supplementary information which cannot bederived from MFI balance sheets, such as
information on holders of negotiableinstruments issued by MFIs, requires furtherdevelopment. Revisions in the monetary and
securities issues statistics have beennecessary in most months, although their
incidence, judging from experience with the
longer-established MFI balance sheetstatistics, should decrease as systems settledown. Finally, statistics on other (non-

monetary) financial institutions, especiallycollective investment institutions, and onfinancial derivatives business are in the
process of being defined.1159
Balance of payments and internationalinvestment position statistics (includingreserves) and effective exchange ratesThe first euro area monthly balance ofpayments (b.o.p.) aggregates covering keyitems were published in April 1999, with data
in ECU back to the beginning of 1998. Thefirst, more detailed, quarterly figures werepublished in September. The first net

international investment position (i.i.p.) datafor the euro area relating to end-1997 and
end-1998 were published in the December
1999 issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin.The concepts and definitions followed inb.o.p./i.i.p. statistics generally conform to the5th edition of the IMF Balance of Payments
Manual (October 1993), although some

departures in the monthly statistics areaccepted in order for it to be possible for
tight deadlines to be met.  Member States

devoted much effort to achievingharmonisation before the publication of thefirst data. However, the revisions observed
in some Member States indicate that theprocess is still incomplete; efforts to enhancedata quality will continue in 2000. The ECB
has taken an active role, in co-operation withthe European Commission (Eurostat), NCBsand statistical institutes, in analysing

discrepancies in b.o.p. statistics.Portfolio investment and the ﬁotherinvestmentﬂ account present the greatestchallenges to compilers of b.o.p. and i.i.p.statistics. A major difficulty, with
repercussions throughout financial statistics,
is the recording of holdings of negotiablesecurities, together with the necessary
breakdowns.The Eurosystem™s international reserves have
been published with the b.o.p. data sinceApril. These data comprise the Eurosystem™sforeign currency claims on non-residents of
the euro area, together with gold, special
drawing rights and reserve positions in theIMF. Foreign currency claims on residents of
the euro area Œ for example, non-euro
deposits placed with banks located inparticipating Member States Œ are published
separately, but are not included ininternational reserves. Preparations weremade for the publication of the Eurosystem™s
international reserves in accordance with thenew standard established by the IMF and theBIS beginning in March 2000.In the early months of Stage Three of
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), the
ECB used a measure of the effective exchangerate of the euro compiled by the BIS. SinceOctober 1999 the ECB has published its own
index, calculated as a geometric weightedaverage of bilateral exchange rates of theeuro against the currencies of 13 countries,
taking account of bilateral trade as well ascompetition in third markets. A monthlyﬁrealﬂ index makes adjustment for changes in
consumer prices in the euro area andcompetitor countries.Financial accounts
The ECB is developing financial accountsstatistics, covering financial flows and astatement of financial assets and liabilities
outstanding, to complement monetaryanalysis and economic research.The main sources for these data will be euroarea MFI consolidated balance sheet, b.o.p.and securities issues statistics; financial

statistics for the government sector in euroarea countries; and national financialaccounts, as required under the European
System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95), which
represents a powerful instrument forharmonisation.At present the ECB publishes annual datarelating to the saving, investment and
financing of private non-financial sectors inthe euro area from national capital andfinancial accounts. The intention is to compile
such data from the quarterly euro areasources mentioned above, making the bestpossible use of national financial accounts

data.9
116Economic statisticsThe ESCB™s primary objective according tothe Treaty is to maintain price stability; the
measure of prices used for this purpose isthe Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices(HICP) covering the euro area. The ECB also
uses a wide range of economic data to makea broadly based assessment of the outlook
for price developments and the risks to price
stability in the euro area. The ECBconsequently takes a keen interest in the
quality and availability of statistics relating to
prices and costs, national accounts, labour
market data, and economic indicators ingeneral. Survey data of a qualitative nature

are also used. Frequency and timeliness areimportant elements of quality as far as theiruse to support the conduct of monetary

policy is concerned.Further progress has been made with regardto the HICP. Its coverage has been extended
to include the health, education and socialprotection sectors, although no backdata for

the newly covered items are available. Theissue of the treatment of owner occupiedhousing expenditures remains to be resolved.The European Commission (Eurostat)produces three quarterly estimates for euro
area GDP, after 70, 100 and 120 days. Some
estimation is necessary since not all euroarea countries currently compile quarterly
accounts. The introduction of the ESA 95proved to be more difficult than expected.Some indicators, particularly labour market

statistics, are still missing for many countries,thus making it impossible to compile euroarea aggregates which are consistent with
national accounts. The lack of employmentand labour cost data for the euro area alsoaffects derived indicators such as unit labour
costs.The European Commission publishes euroarea aggregates for several short-termindicators, in particular industrial production
and producer prices. Most indicators do not

cover all euro area countries and rely onsome estimation. The timeliness of the dataimproved in 1999. Full implementation of theEU Council Regulation on short-termstatistics (1998) will take some years owingto derogations. The ECB uses timely business
and consumer confidence surveys carried outby the European Commission on a monthlybasis.Co-operation with the EuropeanCommissionMoney and banking statistics are theresponsibility of the ECB at the Europeanlevel; responsibility for b.o.p., i.i.p. andfinancial accounts statistics is shared between
the ECB and the European Commission(Eurostat); price and cost and other economicstatistics are the responsibility of the
European Commission. This division ofresponsibility worked well in 1999.Co-operation with international institutionsIn accordance with Article 5.1 of the Statuteof the ESCB, the ECB also co-operates closely
with international organisations with regard
to statistical matters. Co-operation in 1999,involving mainly the BIS and the IMF, wasparticularly close in the areas of b.o.p.
statistics and international reserves, securities
issues (where the BIS is the source of dataon euro-denominated issues by non-residents
of the euro area), and data relating to theinternational use of the euro.Statistics relating to non-participatingMember StatesAll EU Member States were stronglyencouraged to undertake the statistical

preparations for participation in Stage Three
of EMU. In practice, the ECB receives a fairlyfull set of data from non-participating
Member States. The data are used to monitoreconomic and financial developments in thosecountries. The integration of statistics relating
to those countries into euro area aggregateswill, however, require intensive work with
1179
the country or countries concerned in theperiod preceding the enlargement of the euroarea.9
118Chapter IXOther tasksand activities9
1201Advisory functions
Box 7Consultation procedures in 1999No.OriginatorSubject
1Spain
Implementation of Directive 98/26/EC of 19 May 1998 onsettlement finality in payment and securities settlement
systems (ﬁSettlement Finality Directiveﬂ)
2Italy
Amendments to law on the introduction of the euro3Italy
Production and issuance of coins4Greece
Dematerialisation of the shares of the Bank of Greece5Austria
Banking supervisory authority6European CommissionDetailed rules for the implementation of Council Regulation
(EC) No. 2494/95 as regards minimum standards for the
treatment of insurance in the Harmonised Index of ConsumerPrices17Austria
Implementation of Directive 97/5/EC of 27 January 1997 oncross-border credit transfers and of the Settlement Finality
Directive8European CommissionAmendment to the Commission Regulation (EC) No. 2214/96
concerning the sub-indices of the Harmonised Index of
Consumer Prices29Sweden
Implementation of the Settlement Finality Directive10Germany
Third act on the introduction of the euro11EU CouncilDetailed rules for the implementation of Council Regulation
(EC) No. 2494/95 as regards minimum standards for thetreatment of products in the health, education and social
protection sectors in the Harmonised Index of Consumer
Prices3Article 105 (4) of the Treaty and Article 4 ofthe Statute of the ESCB require that the
ECB be consulted by the EU Council orthe responsible national authorities, asappropriate, on any proposed Community or
national legislation within the ECB™s fields ofcompetence.The limits and conditions which apply toconsultations on draft legislation by nationalauthorities are set out in Council Decision
98/415/EC of 29 June 1998.In addition, the ECB may be consulted on avoluntary basis by national authorities ondraft legislation implementing EC Directiveswithin its fields of competence.
In total, 22 consultations were initiated in1999, of which three involved Community
legal acts and 19 related to draft nationallegislative provisions falling within the fieldsof competence of the ECB. This is less than
in 1998 (64 consultations), since legislationon the statutes of the NCBs and on theintroduction of the euro was passed before

January 1999.The box below summarises the consultationsinitiated in 1999.1OJ C 252, 3.9.1999, p.4.
2OJ C 285, 7.10.1999, p.14.

3OJ C 324, 12.11.1999, p.11.
1219
12IrelandCopyright and Related Rights Bill
13The NetherlandsProtection of credit institutions and other financial institutions
against liabilities resulting from the closure of payment and
securities settlement systems on 31 December 199914PortugalDraft law endowing the Banco de Portugal with the
competence (i) to produce and print paper money and other
security documents, (ii) to perform the distribution ofbanknotes and (iii) to develop services related to the pursuance
of such activities15Portugal(i) Legal framework of credit institutions and financial
companies concerning the Deposit Guarantee Fund and(ii) activities of the Deposit Guarantee Fund16SpainArrangements for the allocation of the Banco de España™s
profits to the Treasury17LuxembourgContractual obligations of the financial sector due on
31 December 199918GreeceAmendments to the Statute of the Bank of Greece

19LuxembourgImplementation of the Settlement Finality Directive

20FranceStatute and role of the IEDOM (Institut d™émission des
départements d™outre-mer)
21France
Statute and role of the IEDOM22Luxembourg
Balance of payments statistics2Compliance with the prohibitions on monetary financing and
privileged accessPursuant to Article 237d (ex Article 180d) ofthe Treaty establishing the EuropeanCommunity (the Treaty), the ECB is
entrusted with the task of monitoringcompliance on the part of the 15 NCBs ofthe EU with the provisions under Articles
101 and 102 (ex Articles 104 and 104arespectively) of the Treaty and the relatedCouncil Regulations (EC) Nos. 3603/93 and
3604/93. Article 101 prohibits the ECB and
the NCBs from providing overdraft facilities
or any other type of credit facility to

governments and Community institutions orbodies, as well as from purchasing debtinstruments directly from them. Article 102
prohibits any measure, not based onprudential considerations, which establishesprivileged access for governments and
Community institutions or bodies to financialinstitutions. From the start of Stage Two ofEMU this monitoring exercise was theresponsibility of the European MonetaryInstitute. As from 1 June 1998 the ECB

continued to monitor the NCBs™ fulfilment of
their obligations. In parallel, the EuropeanCommission monitors Member States™
compliance with the above provisions.The Eurosystem considers it very importantthat the above-mentioned Treaty provisionsand the associated Council Regulations arerespected under all circumstances. Monetary
financing of governments and publicinstitutions, as well as any form of privilegedaccess to financial institutions, would generate
inflationary expectations and would,therefore, significantly hamper the credibilityof the single monetary policy. In addition, it
could reduce the incentives for pursuing thenecessary fiscal consolidation programmes in9
122euro area countries, by providing
governments with an easy way of meetingtheir borrowing requirements.The ECB also monitors the NCBs™ secondarymarket purchases of debt instruments issuedboth by the domestic public sector and by
the public sector of other MemberStates. According to Council Regulation (EC)No. 3603/93, the acquisition of public sector
debt instruments in the secondary market
must not be used to circumvent the objectiveof Article 101 of the Treaty. Such purchases
should not become a form of indirectmonetary financing of the public sector.Overall, the information provided by the NCBsto the ECB confirms that the provisions ofArticles 101 and 102 of the Treaty and the
associated Council Regulations have generally
been complied with during the period underreview. Some imperfections and technical
problems have occurred in the course of
the transition to new arrangements. Theseinconsistencies are of minor importance andcorrective measures are in hand.3Transition to the year 2000
In 1999 the ESCB devoted significant effort
and resources to ensuring a smooth transitionto the year 2000. As the year 2000 problemhad its roots in computer technology, most
of the initial work was aimed at achievingyear 2000 compliance for IT systems, with aparticular focus both on the critical systems
needed to conduct monetary policy and onthe TARGET system.Testing and remedial activitiesAn inventory was compiled of all software
and hardware at the ECB and at each of theNCBs. Where appropriate, systems were
upgraded and year 2000 compliant versionsof software were installed. The ECB and eachof the NCBs were individually responsible
for carrying out a series of tests on theirinternal systems in order to ascertain thatthe systems correctly recognised dates in
2000. In addition to its internal systemcompliance tests, the ECB conducted theinitial testing of the ESCB-wide systems
to the extent that this was possible withina closed environment at the ECB. In thisway, all the individual components of the
Eurosystem-wide information systems weretested for their year 2000 compliance in the
first few months of 1999.Thereafter, a series of bilateral tests wereconducted between the ECB and all the euroarea NCBs, as well as with other non-euro
area NCBs which chose to participate. These
tests were carried out in a simulated year2000 environment, but using the ESCBproduction infrastructure, in order to test
the continued business functionality of the
applications. During testing, only a very smallnumber of year 2000-related problems were
identified. In the few cases where non-
compliance issues were detected, remedialwork was carried out successfully and by late
summer 1999 all critical ECB and ESCBsystems were deemed to be year 2000compliant.In line with other year 2000 complianceactivities of the ESCB, TARGET underwent
an intensive period of testing. The approachused in the tests was based on the testingprocedure which had proven its worth in the
testing of TARGET before it went into
operation on 4 January 1999. After thesuccessful completion of individual tests of
the national components and the connectionsto the S.W.I.F.T. FIN service, ﬁcross-systemﬂtests were conducted, in which all the NCBs™

and the ECB™s systems ran for a full TARGETbusiness day in a simulated year 2000environment. During this second phase a
number of credit institutions were involvedin the testing of the national real-time gross1239
settlement system in each country. Finally,TARGET™s year 2000 compliance wasdemonstrated on Saturday, 25 September1999. Several hundred credit institutions

proved their ability to carry out operationsfor sending and receiving TARGET cross-border payments in a ﬁdress rehearsalﬂ of a
full business day in a simulated year 2000environment. In several countries domestic
payment systems were also tested in
co-operation with third parties.In parallel, tests were carried out on the
correspondent central banking model, whichis a system used to mobilise collateral acrossborders in order to accommodate the need
for collateral for monetary policy operationsand for payment systems. The testing did notreveal any problems.As part of its oversight function, the ESCBalso monitored the progress made by other

large-value and major EU retail paymentsystems, in particular those which settletheir end-of-day balances in TARGET. Having
introduced the TARGET year 2000 strategyas the norm, country reporting procedureswere established to verify that all payment
systems had completed internal testing bythe end of April 1999 and multilateral testingby the end of July 1999.Once the testing and remedial activities hadbeen completed, the ECB entered into a
moratorium, which was in place from1 October 1999 to 1 March 2000, in order toensure that its systems would remain in a
stable year 2000 compliant status.Other precautionary measuresWith a view to limiting transactions on
31 December 1999, and to enable bankinginstitutions to conduct end-of-yearoperations and produce full backups of the
relevant systems prior to the transition to2000, on 31 March 1999 the ECB announced
its decision to close TARGET on
31 December 1999. In line with this measure,the ECB was also instrumental in bringingforward legislative initiatives by the EU
Member States by proposing a communiqué,as endorsed by the ministers of finance on17 April 1999. The communiqué stated that
Member States should ensure by appropriatemeans that, as on a normal public holiday,the fulfilment of any contractual obligations
on the part of credit institutions or otheragents in the financial markets, at least fortransactions in euro, would neither fall due

nor be enforceable on 31 December 1999.In addition to its intensive internal compliance
activities, the ECB also analysed the impactthat the year 2000 transition might have onthe euro area. As a result of this exercise, it
concluded that the monetary and economicimplications of the year 2000 transition wereunlikely to be of relevance to the ECB™s
medium-term-oriented monetary policystrategy. The ECB saw no need for the publicto hold higher amounts of banknotes during
the transition period than would normally bethe case at year-ends; nonetheless, NCBsensured that sufficient stocks of banknotes
were available to meet any extraordinaryprecautionary demand.Furthermore, the ECB carefully assessed theappropriateness of the monetary policyoperational framework of the Eurosystem for
the year 2000 transition. The Eurosystem
announced in August 1999 that it did not seea need to introduce any systemic changes to
its operational framework as a result of thechangeover to the year 2000. Indeed, theoperational framework of the Eurosystem
was, from the outset, designed with a view
to ensuring maximum flexibility in the
implementation of monetary policy and it thus

allows for any technical adaptations that may
be considered appropriate. The Eurosystem™soperational framework already had built-in
mechanisms designed to accommodate anylevel of liquidity demand from market
participants. In view of the above, only a

minor technical change was announced on23 September 1999, namely that no new main
refinancing operation would be initiated in
the first week of 2000, and that no suchoperation would mature during that week,9
124which was made possible by extending thematurity of the last two main refinancing
operations of 1999 to three weeks. Anadditional measure aimed at contributing to a
smooth transition to the year 2000 in themoney markets was the increase in theallotment volume for longer-term refinancing
operations from the previous level of15 billion to 25 billion for the last threelonger-term refinancing operations of 1999.In addition, existing legal agreements to which
the ECB was party were reviewed and, where
necessary, updated to ensure their operabilityin any year 2000 scenario.Nonetheless, the ECB did not wish to ignorethe potential for unexpected problems to
affect the smooth functioning of its systems.

As a precautionary measure, the ECB
therefore reviewed the contingencyprocedures developed for the euro
changeover, in order to ensure their viabilityin the event of any problems arising duringthe transition to the year 2000. It also
prepared emergency procedures which wouldhave enabled ECB staff to conduct criticalactivities from another location. Fortunately,

the ESCB systems entered the year 2000smoothly, and none of the contingency andemergency procedures had to be activated.Communications infrastructureThe various ESCB Committees devotedsignificant resources to year 2000
preparations during 1999. In order toensure the overall consistency of year 2000preparations within the ESCB, the Governing
Council established an ESCB Year 2000Co-ordination Committee, consisting of year2000 co-ordinators from the NCBs. TheCommittee was responsible for co-ordinationamong the ESCB institutions and betweenthe ESCB and international bodies dealing
directly with year 2000 issues. Its main tasksincluded analysing the feasibility and suitabilityof contingency measures and the procedures
for activating such measures, as well asdefining ESCB milestones to be monitoredbefore, during and after the transition to the
year 2000.The ESCB Year 2000 Co-ordinationCommittee formed the core of an efficientcommunications infrastructure between the
ECB and the NCBs, which was established
specifically to monitor developments over theyear 2000 transition period. Through theregular exchange of information concerning
the ESCB™s internal systems andinfrastructures, as well as the euro area
financial markets, the Committee maintained
a continuous overview of the status of theESCB systems and was in a position to detectany potential problems at a very early stage.

The ECB and the NCBs also exchangedinformation with the Joint Year 2000 Councilco-ordinated by the Bank for International
Settlements in an effort to help mitigate year2000-related risks beyond the Eurosystem at
the global level. These infrastructures proved
to be very efficient.A significant number of staff members werepresent at the ECB and at the NCBs during
the year 2000 transition weekend to ensurethat any unforeseen problems could be dealt
with efficiently and effectively. The thoroughpreparations in 1999 were well rewarded, asboth the activities during the transition
weekend and the start of operations on3 January 2000 went very smoothly.1259
4The administration of the borrowing and lending operations by
the European CommunityIn accordance with Article 109I (2) of the
Treaty and Article 11 of Council Regulation(EEC) No. 1969/88 of 24 June 1988, the
ECB continued the administration of the
borrowing and lending operations concludedby the European Community underthe Medium-Term Financial Assistance

mechanism.In 1999 the ECB received the sums due in
respect of interest on outstanding loans fromthe remaining borrower country (Italy) and paidthem to creditors vis-à-vis the European
Community. The total amount of outstandingCommunity lending operations with Italy as at31 December 1998 was 2,483 million. Thisfigure was unchanged as at 31 December 1999.9
126Chapter XPublic information andaccountability9
1281The ECB™s information policy and its tools
1.1Communication policy objectives
Using a wide range of communication tools,the ECB aims to keep the general publicinformed about its objectives and tasks and
to explain the reasons for its actions. In thisway the ECB contributes to fulfilling the aimsof the Eurosystem™s communication policy,
namely to enhance the understanding ofmonetary policy and thus to foster public
acceptance of the Eurosystem™s policies in
the euro area and beyond. Another goal of
the communication policy is to promoteknowledge and understanding of the way in
which the ESCB functions.The ECB is committed to the principles ofopenness, transparency and accountability.With this in mind, it provides variousaudiences with detailed information on its
assessment of developments in the euro area
economy and in the financial markets. Thedissemination of information is organised
with a view to ensuring equal andnon-discriminatory treatment of differentcountries and media. The NCBs in the ESCB

play an important role in achieving the goalsof the ESCB™s communication policy.Some guidance on the communication policycan be found in the Statute of the ESCB,according to which the ECB must publish a

report on the activities of the ESCB at leastonce every quarter. The ECB also has todeliver an annual report on both these
activities and the monetary policy of theprevious and the current year to the
European Parliament, the EU Council, the
European Commission and also the EuropeanCouncil. Furthermore, the ECB is obliged topublish a consolidated weekly financial
statement of the Eurosystem.1.2Communication tools
In fact, the ECB has committed itself to goingbeyond these requirements. The Presidentand the Vice-President of the ECB explainthe reasons behind the Governing Council™sdecisions in a press conference held
immediately after the first Governing Councilmeeting each month. The introductorystatement to this press conference is released
to the press and simultaneously published
on the internet on the ECB™s website
(http://www.ecb.int), and it is also available

on the websites of the NCBs of theEurosystem. This practice has the advantageof presenting the Governing Council™s
assessment of the economic situation andexplaining the main considerations underlying
its decisions straight after the meeting.Further details of the Governing Council™sviews on the economic situation and the

outlook for price developments can be foundin the ECB Monthly Bulletin, which is releasedone week after the first meeting of the
Governing Council each month in all 11
official Community languages.The ECB Monthly Bulletin is intended to
be a valuable tool for observers of the euroarea single monetary policy, be they

financial analysts, academic economists orrepresentatives of the media. The circulationof this publication exceeds 80,000 copies per
issue, not including the number of times this
publication is accessed from the ECB™s
website or from the websites of the NCBs.In addition, the ECB is sponsoring a series ofworking papers, in order to disseminate the
results of research conducted within the ECBto the broader academic and financialcommunities. The subject matter addressed
in the working paper series reflects thoseissues of most relevance to the Eurosystem.A number of reports on topical issues aimedat a professional audience have also beenpublished by the ECB in the period under
review. A comprehensive list of documentspublished by the ECB can be found in anannex to this Annual Report. A complete
and systematic collection of all the publishedECB legal instruments is provided in the1299
ﬁCompendium: collection of legalinstruments, June 1998 Œ May 1999ﬂ, whichwas published in October 1999.The ECB has published a brochure describingthe euro banknotes and coins. The brochureis intended for the general public and is
available in all 11 official Community
languages.In communications with the general public,however, mass media such as newspapers,magazines, radio and television are very
important intermediaries. The Europeanmedia have shown great interest in theEurosystem™s policies and in the outcome of
the Governing Council™s deliberations. Themembers of the Governing Council haveendeavoured to accommodate this interest
by giving a large number of interviews to anumber of media. Public speeches by themembers of the Governing Council have also
given rise to numerous articles in the
European and indeed the international press.As well as the full range of publications andpress releases, a large number of speechesby members of the Executive Board are

available on the ECB™s website. In addition, itcontains background information and a widevariety of statistics on the euro area
economy.Furthermore, the ECB™s website provideslinks to the websites of all the EU NCBs,where much of the material is available in therespective languages. With the increasing useof the Internet as a communication tool, theimportance of the website for the ECB™scommunication policy is growing all the time.
The number of ﬁvisitsﬂ (one or more pages
accessed by the same computer during onesession) to the ECB™s website confirms that
the demand for information through thischannel is considerable. In 1999 this figurefluctuated between 20,000 and 40,000 per
week, with peaks in the weeks in whichpress conferences were held or importantdocuments were published.An intrinsic feature of this communicationinstrument is the multiplication effect
resulting from the distribution of ECBdocuments via other websites. This effect is
impossible to quantify, but should not be
underestimated.The efforts to describe and explain themonetary policy of the Eurosystem wouldnot be complete without personal contactsbetween the staff of the ECB and opinion
leaders and multipliers, such as teachersand students of economics, businessadministration and law, as well as those
involved in other relevant academic fields. Tothis end, groups of visitors are received atthe ECB almost every working day
throughout the year. In 1999 the totalnumber of such visitors exceeded 10,000.Visitors come from all over the world,
although naturally with a concentration ofgroups from the EU countries.2Accountability
2.1Central bank independence and
accountability in Economic andMonetary UnionThe institutional independence of centralbanks allows monetary policy-makers to focuson safeguarding price stability in a lasting and
credible manner, without being subject toshort-term political considerations. A largebody of theoretical analysis, supported by
substantial empirical evidence, supports theview that central bank independence leads toan improved design and implementation of
monetary policy and, therefore, to morestable prices. Consequently, central bankshave been made independent in a large
number of countries around the world. Thismodel is also reflected in the institutional
9
130set-up of the Eurosystem, as laid down in theTreaty. The Treaty stipulates that, whenexercising the powers and carrying out thetasks and duties conferred upon them,
neither the ECB nor the 11 euro area NCBs,nor any members of their decision-makingbodies shall seek or take instructions from

Community institutions or bodies, from any
government of a Member State or from anyother body. Furthermore, the Treaty strictly
requires that the Community institutions andbodies and the governments of the Member
States undertake to respect this principle and
not to seek to influence the decision-making
bodies of the ECB or the NCBs in the
performance of their tasks.To retain democratic legitimacy, an
independent central bank must be

accountable. Therefore, a framework has tobe established which allows the general publicand the competent political bodies to monitor
the policy of the independent institution andto assess whether it is accomplishing the tasks
conferred upon it and is acting within the
scope of its responsibilities. This, in turn,requires a clear and precise definition of itsmandate. In this way, the decisions and
activities of institutions can be assessedagainst a specific benchmark. Where themandate includes more than one objective, it
is essential for these objectives to be clearlyprioritised. Whether or not a task has beenaccomplished must be evaluated by reference
to the observable policy outcome. The
primary objective of the Eurosystem is tomaintain  price stability in the euro area. This

primary objective is the ultimate benchmarkagainst which the performance of the
Eurosystem has to be evaluated. The ECB

has announced a quantitative definition ofprice stability which further specifies, inprecise terms, the yardstick against which
the Eurosystem™s performance should bemeasured, thereby facilitating accountability.2.2The role of the European
Parliament in holding the ECB toaccountSeveral channels for the practicalimplementation of the ECB™s accountabilityare provided for in the Treaty. As described
above, the ECB is subject to stringentreporting requirements vis-à-vis the generalpublic and, more specifically, the European
Parliament, the EU Council, the EuropeanCommission and also the European Council.As regards the specific accountability of theECB vis-à-vis the European Parliament, theTreaty stipulates that the President of the
ECB and other members of the ExecutiveBoard of the ECB may, at the request of theEuropean Parliament or on their own
initiative, be heard by the competent
committees of the European Parliament.
According to the Rules of Procedure of the
European Parliament, the President of theECB shall be invited to attend meetings ofthe competent committees at least four times
a year to deliver a statement and answerquestions.The regular appearances of the President
before the Committee on Economic andMonetary Affairs can certainly be considered
as one of the cornerstones of the process by
which the ECB is held to account. In thiscontext, the ECB took note of the decision

of the European Parliament to restructureits internal working procedures and toestablish the Committee on Economic and
Monetary Affairs as a full committee in its
own right. When appearing before theCommittee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs, the President of the ECB and othermembers of the Executive Board have theopportunity to explain in detail the ECB™s

assessment of current economic andmonetary developments in the context ofthe monetary policy strategy of the
Eurosystem, which underpins its monetarypolicy decisions, as well as the decisions takenby the ECB in other areas of its competence.1319
The transcripts of these hearings arepublished on the websites of both theEuropean Parliament and the ECB shortlyafter each hearing, in order to make the
President™s statements and the discussionsduring the question and answer sessions ofthe hearings available to the general public as
soon as possible. In 1999 these quarterlyhearings were held on 18 January, 19 April,27 September and 29 November.Moreover, the Treaty stipulates that thePresident of the ECB shall present an annual
report on the activities of the ESCB and on
its monetary policy to the European
Parliament, which may hold a general debate

on that basis. In line with this provision, on
26 October 1999 the President attended theplenary session of the European Parliament
in order to present the ECB™s Annual Report1998.Furthermore, the European Parliamentinvited members of the Executive Board andstaff of the ECB to participate in additional
hearings on a number of specific issues
including, inter alia, the externalrepresentation of the Eurosystem, thepreparation of the euro banknotes and
statistical matters. These hearings provide asupplementary forum in which the ECB canpresent its views and explain the reasoning
behind its opinions. In addition, a closeworking relationship has been established
between the ECB and the European
Parliament, which also includes occasionalvisits by members of the Committee onEconomic and Monetary Affairs to the ECB.
9
132Chapter XIThe institutional frameworkof the Eurosystemand the European Systemof Central BanksECB Annual Report Ł 1999
1341The Eurosystem and the European System of Central Banks
EURO
SYSTEM
EUROPEAN SYSTEMOFCENTRALBANKS (ESCB)
European Central Bank (ECB)
Governing 
CouncilExecutive 
Board
Governing 
CouncilExecutive 
Board
General CouncilGeneral CouncilEuropean Central Bank (ECB)
DanmarksNationalbankBank of Greece
Sveriges Riksbank
Bank of EnglandNationale Bank van Belgi‚/Banque Nationale de BelgiqueDeutsche Bundesbank
Banco de EspanøaBanque de France

Central Bank of Ireland

Banca dÕItaliaDanmarksNationalbankBank of Greece
Sveriges Riksbank
Bank of EnglandNationale Bank van Belgi‚/Banque Nationale de BelgiqueDeutsche Bundesbank
Banco de EspanøaBanque de France

Central Bank of Ireland

Banca dÕItaliaBanque centrale duLuxembourg
De Nederlandsche Bank
Oesterreichische Nationalbank

Banco de Portugal

Suomen Pankki
Banque centrale duLuxembourg
De Nederlandsche Bank
Oesterreichische Nationalbank

Banco de Portugal

Suomen Pankki
The European System of Central Banks
(ESCB) is composed of the European CentralBank (ECB) and the national central banks
(NCBs) of all 15 EU Member States, i.e. it
includes the four NCBs of the Member Stateswhich have not yet adopted the euro. In

order to enhance transparency and facilitate
understanding of the structure of centralbanking in the EU, the term ﬁEurosystemﬂ

has been adopted by the Governing Councilof the ECB. The Eurosystem comprises theECB and the NCBs of the Member States
which have adopted the euro. As long asthere are Member States which have not yet
adopted the euro, it will be necessary to

make a distinction between the Eurosystemand the ESCB.The ECB has legal personality under public
international law. It has been established asthe core of the Eurosystem and ensures that
the tasks of the Eurosystem are carried out
either through its own activities or via theNCBs. In taking its decisions on the way in
which the tasks of the ESCB should be carried
out, the ECB is committed to the principle
of decentralisation in accordance with theStatute of the ESCB.Each of the NCBs has legal personalityaccording to the national law of its respectivecountry. Despite having separate legal
personality, the euro area NCBs form anintegral part of the Eurosystem. As such,NCBs carry out the tasks conferred upon
the Eurosystem in accordance with therules established by the ECB. Inter alia,
through the participation of their respective
representatives in the various ESCBCommittees (see Section 4 below), the NCBsalso contribute to the work of the ESCB.

The NCBs may perform non-Eurosystemfunctions on their own responsibility, unlessthe Governing Council finds that such
functions interfere with the objectives andtasks of the Eurosystem.1359
2The decision-making bodies of the ECB
1The Rules of Procedure have been published in the Official
Journal of the European Communities, see Rules of Procedure
of the European Central Bank, OJ L 125, 19.5.1999, p. 34;
Rules of Procedure of the General Council of the ECB, OJ L 75,
20.3.1999, p. 36 and L 156, 23.6.1999, p. 52; Decision of the

European Central Bank of 12 October 1999 concerning the
Rules of Procedure of the Executive Board of the European
Central Bank (ECB/1999/7), OJ L 314, 8.12.1999, p. 34. With
the exception of the latter, they have been reproduced in the
ECB™s first legal yearbook ﬁCompendium: Collection of legal
instruments, June 1998 Œ May 1999ﬂ, October 1999.
The Eurosystem and the ESCB are governedby the decision-making bodies of the ECB:
the Governing Council and the ExecutiveBoard. Without prejudice to this, theGeneral Council is constituted as a third
decision-making body of the ECB, if and for
as long as there are Member States whichhave not yet adopted the euro as their
currency. The functioning of the decision-making bodies is governed by the Treatyestablishing the European Community
(Treaty), the Statute of the ESCB and therelevant Rules of Procedure.1 While decisions
relating to the objectives and tasks of
the Eurosystem/ESCB are taken centrally,operations in the euro area are decentralised
and are carried out by the NCBs to the
extent deemed appropriate and possible.2.1The Governing Council
The Governing Council, which is the supremedecision-making body of the ECB, comprisesall the members of the Executive Board andthe governors of the NCBs of the Member
States which have adopted the euro.According to the Treaty, the main
responsibilities of the Governing Council are:to adopt the guidelines and take the
decisions necessary to ensure the
performance of the tasks entrusted to theESCB; andto formulate the monetary policy of theeuro area, including, as appropriate,decisions relating to intermediatemonetary objectives, key interest rates and
the supply of reserves in the Eurosystem,
and to establish the necessary guidelinesfor their implementation.When taking decisions on monetary policyand on other tasks of the Eurosystem, the

members of the Governing Council do notact as national representatives, but in afully independent personal capacity. This is
reflected in the principle of ﬁone person, onevoteﬂ.In 1999 the Governing Council met, as arule, every other week at the ECB™s premisesin Frankfurt am Main. However, two of
these meetings were held by means of
teleconferencing. Moreover, the GoverningCouncil decided to meet twice a year in
another euro area country as of 2000. In2000 one meeting will be hosted by the Banco
de España in Madrid and one by the Banque
de France in Paris.9
136Back row (left to right): Luis Ángel Rojo, Guy Quaden, Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Jean-Claude Trichet, Klaus Liebscher,Antonio Fazio, Yves Mersch, Maurice O™Connell, Vítor Manuel Ribeiro Constâncio, Nout Wellink, Matti Vanhala, Ernst Welteke,Eugenio Domingo SolansFront row (left to right): Otmar Issing, Christian Noyer, Willem F. Duisenberg, Sirkka HämäläinenWillem F. DuisenbergPresident of the ECBChristian NoyerVice-President of the ECBVítor Manuel Ribeiro Constâncio
Governor of the Banco de Portugal(as of 23 February 2000)Eugenio Domingo SolansMember of the Executive Board of the ECB
Antonio FazioGovernor of the Banca d™ItaliaSirkka HämäläinenMember of the Executive Board of the ECB
Otmar IssingMember of the Executive Board of the ECB
Klaus LiebscherGovernor of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank
Yves MerschGovernor of the Banque centrale du LuxembourgMaurice O™Connell
Governor of the Central Bank of IrelandTommaso Padoa-SchioppaMember of the Executive Board of the ECB
Guy Quaden (as of 1 March 1999)Governor of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de BelgiqueLuis Ángel RojoGovernor of the Banco de EspañaAntónio José Fernandes de SousaGovernor of the Banco de Portugal(until 22 February 2000)Hans Tietmeyer (until 31 August 1999)President of the Deutsche BundesbankJean-Claude TrichetGovernor of the Banque de FranceMatti VanhalaGovernor of Suomen PankkiAlfons Verplaetse
Governor of the Nationale Bank van België/(until 28 February 1999)Banque Nationale de BelgiqueNout WellinkPresident of De Nederlandsche BankErnst Welteke (as of 1 September 1999)President of the Deutsche BundesbankThe Governing Council1379
Back row (left to right): Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Otmar Issing, Sirkka Hämäläinen, Eugenio Domingo SolansFront row: Christian Noyer, Willem F. DuisenbergWillem F. DuisenbergPresident of the ECBChristian NoyerVice-President of the ECBEugenio Domingo SolansMember of the Executive Board of the ECBSirkka HämäläinenMember of the Executive Board of the ECBOtmar IssingMember of the Executive Board of the ECBTommaso Padoa-SchioppaMember of the Executive Board of the ECB2.2The Executive Board
The Executive Board comprises the President,
the Vice-President and four other members,
appointed by common accord of thegovernments of the participating MemberStates at the level of the Heads of State or

Government. The main responsibilities of theExecutive Board are:to prepare the meetings of the Governing
Council;to implement monetary policy inaccordance with the guidelines anddecisions laid down by the GoverningCouncil and, in doing so, to give thenecessary instructions to the EurosystemNCBs;to be responsible for the current business
of the ECB; andto assume certain powers delegated to it
by the Governing Council, including those
of a regulatory nature.Current practice is for the Executive Boardto meet at least once a week in order todecide on, inter alia, the allotment volumefor the main refinancing operations of the

Eurosystem.9
1382.3The General Council
The General Council is composed of thePresident and the Vice-President of the ECB
and the governors of all 15 NCBs, i.e. ofboth participating and non-participatingMember States. It carries out those tasks
taken over from the European MonetaryInstitute which, on account of the fact thatthe Member States have not all adopted the
euro, still have to be performed by the ECBin Stage Three of Economic and MonetaryUnion. Therefore, the General Council is
primarily responsible for reporting on the
progress made towards convergence by thenon-participating Member States2 and forgiving advice on the necessary preparationsfor irrevocably fixing the exchange rates ofthe currencies of those Member States (see
Chapter III). Moreover, the General Councilcontributes to particular activities of the
ESCB, such as the advisory functions (see
Chapter IX) and the collection of statisticalinformation (see Chapter VIII). In 1999 theGeneral Council met every three months in
Frankfurt.2In accordance with the Protocol on certain provisions relating to
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the Protocol on certain provisions relating to Denmark, both of
which are annexed to the Treaty, this reporting shall be carried
out for the United Kingdom and Denmark only if they decide to
adopt the euro.1399
Back row (left to right): Yves Mersch, Urban Bäckström, Nout Wellink, Jean-Claude Trichet, Maurice O™Connell,Lucas D. Papademos, Klaus Liebscher, Matti Vanhala, Vítor Manuel Ribeiro Constâncio, Luis Ángel Rojo, Ernst Welteke,Edward A. J. George, Guy QuadenFront row (left to right): Antonio Fazio, Christian Noyer, Willem F. Duisenberg, Bodil Nyboe AndersenWillem F. DuisenbergPresident of the ECBChristian NoyerVice-President of the ECBBodil Nyboe AndersenGovernor of Danmarks NationalbankUrban BäckströmGovernor of Sveriges RiksbankVítor Manuel Ribeiro ConstâncioGovernor of the Banco de Portugal(as of 23 February 2000)
Antonio FazioGovernor of the Banca d™ItaliaEdward A. J. GeorgeGovernor of the Bank of EnglandKlaus LiebscherGovernor of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank
Yves MerschGovernor of the Banque centrale du LuxembourgMaurice O™Connell
Governor of the Central Bank of IrelandLucas D. PapademosGovernor of the Bank of GreeceGuy Quaden (as of 1 March 1999)Governor of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de BelgiqueLuis Ángel RojoGovernor of the Banco de EspañaAntónio José Fernandes de SousaGovernor of the Banco de Portugal(until 22 February 2000)Hans Tietmeyer (until 31 August 1999)President of the Deutsche BundesbankJean-Claude TrichetGovernor of the Banque de FranceMatti VanhalaGovernor of Suomen PankkiAlfons Verplaetse
Governor of the Nationale Bank van België/(until 28 February 1999)Banque Nationale de BelgiqueNout WellinkPresident of De Nederlandsche Bank
Ernst Welteke (as of 1 September 1999)President of the Deutsche BundesbankThe General Council9
1403See the Decision of the European Central Bank of7 October 1999 on fraud prevention (ECB/1999/5),
OJ L 291, 13.11.1999, p. 36. In connection with this, the
Rules of Procedure of the European Central Bank were
amended by a new Article 9a, see OJ L 314, 8.12.1999,
p. 32.4See the Decision of the European Central Bank of16 November 1999 appointing the members of the
Anti-Fraud Committee of the European Central Bank
(ECB/1999/8), OJ L 299, 20.11.1999, p. 40.5ﬁOffice européen de lutte antifraudeﬂ.3The organisation of the ECB
3.1Corporate governance
Ever since the establishment of the ECB thefinancial interests of the shareholders of the
ECB have been protected and monitored
both by the external auditors in accordance
with Article 27.1 of the Statute of the ESCBand, with regard to specific aspects, by the
European Court of Auditors in accordancewith Article 27.2 of the Statute of the ESCB.Moreover, the ECB has its own internal audit
and control procedures, which follow thegeneral rules relating to the control
structures of private financial and credit
institutions. The Directorate Internal Auditcontinuously assesses the ECB™s efficiency andinternal control functions. The Directorate
is involved in reviewing the reliability
and integrity of financial information. In
addition, the Internal Auditors Committee
(see Section 4) ensures EU-wide co-operationamong the ESCB™s internal audit functions, byjointly defining audit programmes and audit
standards to be used in a decentralisedmanner for the review of ESCB-widecommon infrastructures. The budgetary

authority of the ECB is vested in the
Governing Council, which adopts the budgetof the ECB, acting on a proposal put forward
by the Executive Board. In addition, theBudget Committee assists the GoverningCouncil in matters related to the ECB™s

budget. It is worth mentioning that, amongthe set of internal controls, the ECB also hasinternal rules to prevent the abuse of sensitive

financial market information (ﬁinsider tradingrulesﬂ and ﬁChinese wallsﬂ).In this respect, the ECB shares the concernsof the European Parliament, the EU Counciland the European Commission with regard
to the need to combat fraud and has joinedthe Community initiative against fraud. On7 October 1999 an Anti-Fraud Committee was
established to enforce an anti-fraud schemewithin the ECB.3 The Anti-Fraud Committee
is composed of three independent persons of
recognised standing and professionalexperience in the fields of central banking,justice and policing, and fraud preventionand detection, all of whom were appointed
by the Governing Council, namely:John L. Murray, Judge of the Supreme Courtof Ireland, Erik Ernst Nordholt, adviser tothe Minister for the Interior of theNetherlands and former Commissionerof the Amsterdam Police Force, and

Maria Schaumayer, Governor of theOesterreichische Nationalbank from 1990 to
1995. The members of the Anti-Fraud
Committee took up their functions with effect
from 1 January 2000.4 In response to the
conclusions of the Cologne European Council
in June 1999, a co-operative relationship willbe established with the European Anti-FraudOffice (OLAF5). Within the ECB, theDirectorate Internal Audit is entrusted withthe task of performing all investigations
relating to fraud prevention and detection
and, for this purpose, reports directly to theAnti-Fraud Committee.3.2Staff developments
At the end of 1999 the number of staffemployed by the ECB from all 15 Member
States stood at 732. This compares with
534 staff at the end of 1998. On 2 December1999 the Governing Council approved theECB™s budget for 2000, which envisages
bringing the ECB™s staff to slightly over 1,000in the course of the year. As a consequence,the Executive Board decided on a number
of organisational adjustments aimed atreinforcing the ECB™s managerial structure,which are reflected in the revised
organisational chart of the ECB which tookeffect as of 4 January 2000.1419
ECB Executive BoardPresident Willem F. DuisenbergDirectorateExternal RelationsM. J. KırberDirectorateSecretariat and Language Services F. MossDirectorateInternal Audit*M. CaparelloCounsel to theExecutive BoardCo-ordinator:L. HoogduinDivisionOfficial Publications,Archives and LibraryDivisionSecretariatDivisionPressDivision Language ServicesDivision ESCB AuditDivision ECB AuditDivisionProtocol and ConferencesECB Executive BoardVice-President Christian NoyerDirectorateInternal FinanceI. IngramDirectoratePersonnelB. van BaakDivisionFinancial LawDivisionDivisionAccountingDivisionFinancial Reportingand PolicyDivisionPremisesT. RinderspracherDivisionPremisesPersonnelDevelopmentDivisionPersonnel PolicyDirectorate GeneralAdministration and PersonnelH. K. SchellerDirectorate GeneralLegal ServicesA. S⁄inz de VicuŒaDivisionInstitutional LawDivisionMiddle OfficeECB Executive BoardEugenio Domingo SolansDivisionBalance of PaymentsStatistics and ExternalReservesDivisionIT BusinessDevelopmentDivisionIT Operations andCustomer ServiceDirectorate GeneralInformation SystemsJ. EtheringtonDirectorate GeneralStatisticsP. BullDivisionGeneral Economic andFinancial StatisticsDivisionMoney and BankingStatisticsDirectorateControllingand OrganisationK. GressenbauerDivisionDivisionPortfolio Management SystemsDivisionOwn FundsManagement Back OfficeDivisionDivisionBudget and ProjectsDivisionOrganisational PlanningFront OfficeDivisionOperations AnalysisDirectorate GeneralOperationsF. PapadiaDirectorateBanknotesA. HeinonenECB Executive BoardOtmar IssingDirectorate GeneralResearchV. GasparAdviserDivisionEconometricModellingDivisionGeneral EconomicResearchECB Executive BoardTommaso Padoa-SchioppaDivisionPayment SystemsPolicyDivisionInternational RelationsDivisionEuropean RelationsDivisionBilateral RelationsDirectorate GeneralInternational andEuropean RelationsP. Van der HaegenDivisionTARGET and PaymentProcessingDivisionSecurities SettlementSystems PolicyDirectorate GeneralPayment SystemsJ.-M. GodeffroyDivisionPrudential SupervisionDivisionIT Infrastructureand Systems SupportDivisionIS SecurityDivisionIT Planning andMajor ProjectsDivisionDedicated IT Application SupportDivisionOffice Services and SecurityDivisionStatistical Information SystemsDirectorateMonetary PolicyH.-J. KlıckersDirectorateEconomic DevelopmentsW. SchillDivision Monetary PolicyStrategyDivision Euro Area MacroeconomicDevelopmentsDivision Monetary Policy StanceDivisionEU CountriesDivision Capital Markets andFinancial StructureDivision ExternalDevelopmentsECB PermanentRepresentation inWashington, D.C.G. GrisseECB Executive BoardSirkka H−m−l−inenDirectorate GeneralEconomicsG. J. HogewegDivision Fiscal Policies3.3The organisational chart of the ECB
*Within the Directorate Internal Audit an Anti-Fraud Unit has been set up, which will report via the Director Internal Audit to
 the
Anti-Fraud Committee established pursuant to the Decision of the European Central Bank on fraud prevention (ECB/1999/5) of
7 October 1999.
9
1424ESCB Committees
The ESCB Committees have continued toplay an important role in the performance of
the tasks of the Eurosystem/ESCB. At therequest of both the Governing Council andthe Executive Board, they have provided
expertise in their fields of competence andhave facilitated the decision-making process.The ESCB Committees are composed of
representatives of the Eurosystem centralbanks and, where appropriate, of othercompetent bodies, such as national
supervisory authorities in the case of theBanking Supervisory Committee. The NCBsof the non-participating Member States haveeach also appointed a representative to takepart in the meetings of an ESCB Committee
whenever it deals with matters which fallwithin the field of competence of the General
Council. At present there are 13 ESCB
Committees, 12 of which were establishedunder Article 9 of the Rules of Procedure ofthe European Central Bank. However, the

Budget Committee, which assists theGoverning Council in matters related to theECB™s budget, was established in accordance
with Article 15 of the Rules of Procedure ofthe European Central Bank.ESCB Committees and their chairpersonsStatistics Committee(STC)Peter BullPayment and Settlement Systems Committee(PSSC)Jean-Michel GodeffroyMonetary Policy Committee(MPC)Gert Jan HogewegMarket Operations Committee(MOC)Francesco PapadiaLegal Committee(LEGCO)Antonio Sáinz de VicuñaInternational Relations Committee(IRC)Hervé HannounInternal Auditors Committee(IAC)Michèle CaparelloInformation Technology Committee(ITC)Jim EtheringtonExternal Communications Committee(ECCO)Manfred J. KörberBudget Committee(BUCOM)Liam BarronBanknote Committee(BANCO)Antti HeinonenBanking Supervision Committee(BSC)Edgar MeisterAccounting and Monetary Income Committee(AMICO)Hanspeter K. Scheller1439
9
144Annual Accountsof the ECBand Consolidated Balance Sheetof the Eurosystem
1999
Chapter XIIECB Annual Report Ł 1999
146Balance Sheet as at 31 December 1999AssetsNote19991998
number1Gold and gold receivables16,956,995,2730
2Claims on non-euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency2
Balances with banks and security
investments, external loans and otherexternal assets41,923,041,208343,047,341
3Claims on euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency2
Claims on financial sector counterparties2,595,090,8600
4Claims on non-euro area residents
denominated in euro3
Balances with banks, securityinvestments and loans3,002,567,6593,739,796,108
5Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro43,537,141,2850
6Other assets
6.1Tangible and intangible fixed assets
5.142,589,46730,112,071
6.2Other financial assets
5.2641,807,40625,276,953
6.3Accruals and deferred expenditure
5.3777,032,332553,582
6.4Sundry items
5.46,774,1493,458,140
1,468,203,35459,400,746
7Loss for the year247,281,2230
Total assets59,730,320,8624,142,244,195
147
LiabilitiesNote19991998
number1Liabilities to other euro area residents
denominated in euro61,080,000,0000
2Liabilities to non-euro area residents
denominated in euro7301,656,9110
3Liabilities to non-euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency8
Deposits, balances and other liabilities4,708,950,9460
4Intra-Eurosystem liabilities
4.1Liabilities due to the transfer
of foreign reserves9.139,468,950,0000
4.2Other liabilities within the
Eurosystem (net)9.21,720,937,6460
41,189,887,6460
5Other liabilities10
5.1Off-balance-sheet instruments:
revaluation differences0725,321
5.2Accruals and deferred income1,237,727,1664,172,760
5.3Sundry items302,605,48178,550,581
1,540,332,64783,448,662
6Provisions1121,862,23931,006,791

7Revaluation accounts126,860,539,710697,979

8Capital and reserves13
8.1Capital3,999,550,2503,999,550,250
8.2Reserves27,540,5130
4,027,090,7633,999,550,250
9Profit for the year027,540,513

Total liabilities59,730,320,8624,142,244,195

148Profit and Loss Account for the year ending 31 December 1999Note19991998
number(7 
months)Interest income4,872,234,88097,851,703
Interest expenses(4,118,082,387)(2,683,980)
Net interest income1754,152,49395,167,723

Realised gains/losses arising from financial operations
2(264,942,584)22,182,536
Write-downs on financial assets and positions3(604,920,383)(22,249,604)
Net result of financial operations, write-downsand risk provisions(115,710,474)95,100,655
Income from fees and commissions593,9020
Expenses relating to fees and commissions(361,702)0
Net income from fees and commissions4232,2000

Other income5436,898490,101
Total net income(115,041,376)95,590,756
Staff costs6 & 7(61,022,091)(29,744,540)
Administrative expenses8(60,748,855)(30,229,686)
Depreciation of tangible and intangible fixed assets(10,468,901)(8,076,017)
(Loss)/Profit for the year(247,281,223)27,540,513
Frankfurt am Main, 29 February 2000EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANKWillem F. Duisenberg
President149
Accounting policies1Form and presentation of the financialstatementsThe financial statements of the European
Central Bank (ECB) have been designed to
present fairly the financial position of the ECBand the results of its operations. They havebeen drawn up in accordance with the following
accounting policies, which the GoverningCouncil of the ECB considers to be appropriateto the function of a central bank. These
policies are consistent with the provisions ofArticle 26.4 of the Statute of the ESCB, whichrequire a standardised approach to the rules
governing the accounting and reportingoperations of the Eurosystem.Accounting principlesThe following accounting principles have beenapplied:Łeconomic reality and transparency;prudence;recognition of post-balance-sheet events;materiality;the accruals principle;a going concern basis;consistency and comparability.Basis of accountingThe accounts have been prepared on a historicalcost basis, modified to include market valuation

of marketable securities, gold and all otheron-balance-sheet and off-balance-sheet assetsand liabilities denominated in foreign currency.

Transactions in financial assets and liabilities arereflected in the accounts on the basis of the
date on which they are settled.Gold, foreign currency assets andliabilitiesAssets and liabilities denominated in foreigncurrency are converted into euro at theexchange rate prevailing on the balance sheetdate. Income and expenses are converted at
the exchange rate prevailing at the time of the

transaction. The revaluation of foreign exchange
assets and liabilities is performed on a currency-
by-currency basis, including on-balance-sheet
and off-balance-sheet instruments.Revaluation to the market price for assets
and liabilities denominated in foreign currencyis treated separately from the exchange raterevaluation.No distinction is made between the price
and currency revaluation differences for gold.
Instead a single gold valuation is accountedfor on the basis of the price in euro per fineounce of gold, which is derived from the
exchange rate of the euro against the USdollar on 30 December 1999.SecuritiesAll marketable debt securities and similar assets
are valued at the mid-market prices prevailing
at the balance sheet date. For the year ending

on 31 December 1999, mid-market prices on
29 December 1999 were used. Non-marketablesecurities are valued at cost.Repurchase agreements
Repurchase agreements are recorded in thebalance sheet as collateralised inward
deposits. The balance sheet shows thedeposits and the value of the securities usedas collateral. Securities sold under this type

of agreement remain on the balance sheet ofthe ECB and are treated as if they hadremained part of the portfolio from which

they were sold. Agreements involvingsecurities denominated in foreign currencyhave no effect on the average cost of the
currency position.1The detailed accounting policies of the ECB are laid down in a
Decision of the Governing Council of the ECB of
1 December 1998 (ECB/1998/NP23), which is available on
request.
150Reverse repurchase agreements are recordedas collateralised loans on the assets side ofthe balance sheet, for the value of the loan.Securities acquired under this type of
agreement are not revalued.Income recognitionIncome and expenses are recognised in theperiod in which they are earned or incurred.Realised gains and losses are taken to theprofit and loss account. An average costmethod is used on a daily basis to calculate
the acquisition cost of individual items. In the
event of an unrealised loss on any item at theyear-end, the average cost of that item isreduced in line with the end-of-year exchange

rate and/or market price.Unrealised gains are not recognised asincome, but are transferred directly to arevaluation account.Unrealised losses are taken to theprofit and loss account if they exceedprevious revaluation gains registered in
the corresponding revaluation account.Unrealised losses in any one security or
currency or in gold are not netted against
unrealised gains in other securities orcurrencies.Premiums or discounts arising on purchasedsecurities are calculated and presented aspart of interest income and are amortised
over the remaining life of the assets.
Off-balance-sheet instrumentsCurrency instruments, namely foreignexchange forward transactions, forwardlegs of foreign exchange swaps and other
currency instruments involving an exchange
of one currency for another at a future date,are included in the net foreign currencyposition for the purpose of calculating foreign
exchange gains and losses. Interest rateinstruments are revalued on an item-by-itembasis and treated in a similar manner tosecurities. Profits and losses arising from off-
balance-sheet instruments are recognised andtreated in a similar manner to profits
and losses relating to on-balance-sheetinstruments.Post-balance-sheet eventsAssets and liabilities are adjusted for eventsthat occur between the annual balance sheetdate and the date on which the Governing
Council of the ECB approves the financial
statements if such events materially affectthe condition of assets and liabilities at the
balance sheet date.Intra-Eurosystem balancesIntra-Eurosystem balances (except for thecapital of the ECB and positions resulting
from the transfer of foreign reserve assetsto the ECB) are presented in the balance

sheet of the ECB as a net position.Treatment of tangible and intangiblefixed assetsTangible and intangible fixed assets arevalued at cost less depreciation. Depreciationis calculated on a straight-line basis, beginning
in the quarter after acquisition and continuingover the expected economic lifetime of theasset, namely:computers, related hardware and software,
and motor vehicles: four years;equipment, furniture and plant in building:
ten years.Fixed assets costing less than 10,000 arewritten off in the year of purchase.151
ECB™s retirement planThe ECB operates a defined contributionpension scheme. The assets of the plan, which

exist solely for the purpose of providingbenefits for members of the plan and theirdependants, are included in the other assets
of the ECB and are identified separately.Valuation gains and losses arising on theassets of the pension fund are recognised as
income and expenditure of the retirementplan in the year in which they arise. Thebenefits payable from the core benefit
account, resulting from the contributions ofthe ECB, have minimum guaranteesunderpinning the defined contribution
benefits.Other issuesHaving regard to the role of the ECB as a
central bank, the Executive Board of the ECB
is of the opinion that the publication of acash flow statement will not provide thereaders of the financial statements with any
additional relevant information.In accordance with Article 27 of the Statute
of the ESCB, and on the basis of arecommendation of the Governing Councilof the ECB, the Council of the European
Union approved the appointment ofPricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH as theexternal auditors of the ECB.
152Notes on the Balance Sheet1Gold and gold receivables
The ECB holds 24 million ounces of finegold. This gold was transferred to the ECB atthe beginning of 1999 at its then current

market value of 246.368 per fine ounce, aspart of the foreign reserve assets transferredto the ECB by the NCBs, and represented
15% of the initial value of these assets.2Claims on non-euro area and euro
area residents denominated inforeign currencyThese claims consist of balances with foreignbanks, loans denominated in foreign currency
and investments in securities, denominatedmainly in US dollars and Japanese yen.3Claims on non-euro area residents
denominated in euroThese claims principally represent balanceswith non-participating NCBs arising from
transactions processed via the TARGETsystem.4Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euroThese securities comprise marketable debtissued by specific euro area issuers with a
high level of credit quality.5Other assets
5.1Tangible and intangible fixed assets
Net of cumulative depreciation totalling29.1 million (including depreciation during
the lifetime of the EMI), tangible fixedassets comprised the following main items on
31 December 1999:5.2Other financial assets
The principal components of this item are as
follows:(a)The counterpart of repurchase operations
made in connection with the investmentof the ECB™s own funds. As at31 December 1999 repurchase contracts
of 565.7 million were outstanding.(b)The investment portfolios relating to the
ECB pension fund, which are valued at32.2 million. The assets held representthe investments of accumulated pension
contributions by the ECB and the staff ofthe ECB as at 31 December 1999, andare managed by an external fund manager.
The regular contributions of the ECB
and members of the plan have been
invested on a monthly basis. The assets

of the plan are not fungible with otherfinancial assets of the ECB, and netincome thereon does not constitute
income of the ECB, but is reinvested in
the funds concerned, pending payment ofbenefits. The value of the assets held by
the plan is based on a valuation by theexternal fund manager, using year-endmarket prices.(c)Following an invitation by the Board of
Directors of the Bank for International
Settlements for the ECB to become amember, on 9 December 1999 the ECBpurchased 3,000 shares in the Bank for
International Settlements at a cost of38.5 million.Net book valueNet book value
at 31 Decemberat 31 December
1999 1998
Computers15,865,66012,510,812
Equipment, furniture,plant in building and
motor vehicles5,955,7203,329,884
Assets under construction12,989,83511,864,257
Other fixed assets7,778,2522,407,118
Total42,589,46730,112,071
153
5.3Accruals and deferred expenditure
The principal component of this item is
accrued interest on securities and other
financial assets.5.4Sundry items
This position consists mainly of a claim against
the German Federal Ministry of Finance inrespect of recoverable value added and otherindirect taxes paid. Such taxes are refundable

under the terms of Article 3 of the Protocolconcerning the privileges and immunities ofthe European Communities, which applies to
the ECB by virtue of Article 40 of the Statuteof the ESCB.6Liabilities to other euro area
residents denominated in euroThis item comprises deposits by members of
the Euro Banking Association (EBA), which
are used in order to provide the ECB withcollateral in respect of the EBA paymentssettled through the TARGET system.7Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in euroThese liabilities principally represent thebalance with one non-participating NCBarising from transactions via the TARGETsystem.8Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in foreigncurrencyLiabilities arising from repurchase agreementsin connection with the management of the
foreign currency reserves of the ECB are
shown under this heading.9Intra-Eurosystem liabilities
9.1Liabilities equivalent to the transfer of
foreign reservesAt the start of Stage Three of EMU,
the NCBs of the participating countries
transferred foreign reserve assets to the ECBin accordance with Article 30 of the Statuteof the ESCB and a decision of the Governing
Council of the ECB which gave effect to thatArticle. Amounts equivalent to 39.5 billionwere transferred between 4 and 7 January
1999 in the form of gold, cash and securities.
The currency component (which amountedto 85% of the total value of the transfer)
comprised 90% US dollars and 10% Japaneseyen.Capital key(%)Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique2.86581,432,900,000
Deutsche Bundesbank24.493512,246,750,000
Banco de España8.89354,446,750,000
Banque de France16.83378,416,850,000

Central Bank of Ireland0.8496424,800,000
Banca d™Italia14.89507,447,500,000
Banque centrale du Luxembourg0.149274,600,000

De Nederlandsche Bank4.27802,139,000,000
Oesterreichische Nationalbank2.35941,179,700,000
Banco de Portugal1.9232961,600,000
Suomen Pankki1.3970698,500,000
Total78.937939,468,950,000
The resulting claims of the NCBs aredenominated in euro and remunerated at
the short-term refinancing rates of theEurosystem, adjusted to reflect a zero returnon the gold component (see ﬁNotes on the
profit and loss accountﬂ, Note 1). During thefirst three years of Stage Three of EMU, and
following a decision of the Governing Council,
these claims are subject to a waiver in theevent that the ECB has insufficient net incomeand reserves to cover unrealised losses
caused by falls in the exchange rates relating
to the foreign reserve assets held. Any

154amounts to be waived may not reduce the
liability to below 80% of its original value.9.2Other liabilities within the Eurosystem
(net)This item consists mainly of the TARGET
balances of the participating NCBs vis-à-visthe ECB, as follows:
13Capital and reserves
The fully paid-up subscriptions of theeuro area NCBs to the capital of the ECB
of 5 billion amount to a total of3,946,895,000, as shown below:Due from participating central banksin respect of TARGET7,697,803,922Due to participating central banksin respect of TARGET(9,418,628,635)Net position(1,720,824,713)10Other liabilities
The principal item under the sub-headingﬁsundry itemsﬂ comprises repurchase operationsmade in connection with the investment ofthe ECB™s own funds. The ECB™s liabilities in
respect of the pension fund (32.2 million) arealso shown under this sub-heading.11Provisions
This item consists mainly of administrativeprovisions relating to expenditure on goodsand services.12Revaluation accounts
These accounts represent revaluationreserves arising from unrealised gains on
assets and liabilities, primarily owing to
increases in exchange rates against the euroduring the course of 1999.19991998
Gold1,036,876,2770
Foreign currency5,821,397,453697,979
Securities2,265,9800
Total6,860,539,710697,979
Capital key
(%)Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique2.8658143,290,000
Deutsche Bundesbank24.49351,224,675,000

Banco de España8.8935444,675,000
Banque de France16.8337841,685,000
Central Bank of Ireland0.849642,480,000

Banca d™Italia14.8950744,750,000
Banque centrale du Luxembourg0.14927,460,000
De Nederlandsche Bank4.2780213,900,000

Oesterreichische Nationalbank2.3594117,970,000
Banco de Portugal1.923296,160,000
Suomen Pankki1.397069,850,000
Total78.93793,946,895,000
The non-euro area NCBs™ contributions,which represent 5% of the amount which
would have been payable had these countriesparticipated in Monetary Union, amount to atotal of 52,655,250 as shown below:Capital key
(%)Danmarks Nationalbank1.67094,177,250
Bank of Greece2.05645,141,000
Sveriges Riksbank2.65376,634,250
Bank of England14.681136,702,750
Total21.062152,655,250
These amounts represent contributions to
cover the operational costs incurred by theECB in connection with tasks performed forthe non-euro area NCBs. The non-euro area
NCBs are not required to pay up any capitalsubscriptions beyond the amounts alreadydecided until such time as they join the
Eurosystem. The non-participating NCBs arenot entitled to receive any share of the155
14Off-balance-sheet items
No claims and liabilities remained outstandingon unmatured contracts or other open
positions. No material contingent liabilities
were outstanding as at 31 December 1999.distributable profits of the ECB, nor are theyliable to fund any losses of the ECB.The reserves of the ECB are as follows:1999General reserve fund5,508,000Other reserves0
Retained profit22,032,513Total27,540,513
156Notes on the Profit and Loss Account1Net interest income
This item includes interest income, net ofinterest expense, in respect of the assets andliabilities denominated in foreign currency and
in euro. The bulk of interest income and
expenses arose on balances resulting fromTARGET transactions. Net interest income
on the foreign reserve assets amounted to1.5 billion. Remuneration of 913 millionwas paid to NCBs on their claims on the ECB
in respect of the foreign reserve assets
transferred at the beginning of 1999.Composition of interest incomeDenominated inDenominated
foreign exchange (%)in euro (%)
1999199819991998
(7 months)(7 months)
Securities84.5%0.0%5.1%0.0%
Other assets15.5%100.0%94.9%0.0%

Total100.0%100.0%100.0%0.0%
Composition of interest expense2Realised gains/losses arising from
financial operationsA net realised loss resulted from normalportfolio management transactions in
securities owing to significant falls in theprices of securities held during the course
of 1999.3Write-downs in financial assets and
positionsFalls in prices resulted in the write-down ofthe acquisition cost of securities shown in

the balance sheet to their market value as at31 December 1999 (see ﬁAccounting policies:Income recognitionﬂ).4Net income from fees and
commissionsThe sub-item ﬁIncome from fees andcommissionsﬂ consists of penalties imposedon credit institutions for non-compliance withthe minimum reserve requirement.5Other income
Other miscellaneous income during the yeararose principally from the transfer of unused

administrative provisions to the profit andloss account.6Staff costs
Salaries and allowances (52.3 million) and
employer™s contributions to the ECB™spension fund and to health and accident
insurance are included under this heading.
The emoluments of the Executive Board ofthe ECB amounted to a total of 1.8 million.No pensions were paid to former membersof the Executive Board or their dependantsduring the year. Salaries and allowances of
staff, including the emoluments of holders ofsenior management positions, are modelledin essence on, and are comparable with, the

remuneration scheme of the EuropeanCommunities.On the last working day of 1999 the ECBemployed 732 staff, of whom 55 heldmanagerial positions. The average number of
staff employed by the ECB in 1999 was 648,compared with 478 in 1998. 242 additional
Denominated inDenominated
foreign exchange (%)in euro (%)
1999199819991998
(7 months)(7 months)
Securities99.6%0.0%0.9%0.0%
Other liabilities0.4%0.0%99.1%100.0%

Total100.0%0.0%100.0%100.0%
157
staff were employed during the period, and44 members of staff left the service of theECB.7ECB™s retirement plan
In accordance with the rules of the plan, atriennial full actuarial valuation is required. Afull actuarial valuation will, however, be
carried out annually as long as staff numbersincrease significantly during the year. Thelatest actuarial valuation was carried out as
at 31 December 1998, using the Projected
Unit Credit Method, subject to minimumliabilities equal to cash lump sums that would
be payable to members on terminationof service. The valuation showed that theactuarial value of the fund™s assets
represented 110% of the benefits which hadaccrued to members at the balance sheetdate, after providing for future increases in
earnings and the pensions liability.The pension cost relating to the plan isassessed in accordance with the advice of aqualified actuary. The total pension cost tothe ECB was 8.1 million. This includes aprovision for pensions to members of theExecutive Board of 1.8 million. The requiredfuture service contribution rate by the ECB
is 16.5% of pensionable earnings of all staff.8Administrative expenses
These cover all other current expensesrelating to rental of premises, maintenanceof premises, goods and equipment of a non-capital nature, professional fees and other
services and supplies, together with staff-related expenses including recruitment,relocation, installation, training and
resettlement.
158President and Governing Councilof the European Central BankFrankfurt am MainWe have audited the accompanying financial statements of the European Central Bank as at31 December 1999. The European Central Bank™s Management is responsible for the preparationof the accounts. It is our responsibility to form an independent opinion on these accounts based on
our audit, and to report our opinion to you.We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards of Auditing. An audit includesexaminations, on a test basis, of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in the accounts.It also includes an assessment of the significant estimates and judgements made in the preparation
of the accounts, and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the European Central
Bank™s circumstances and adequately disclosed.In our opinion, the financial statements, which have been prepared under accounting policies set
out in Section I of the notes on the accounts of the European Central Bank, give a true and fairview of the financial position of the European Central Bank at 31 December 1999 and the results ofits operations for the year then ended.Frankfurt am Main, 1 March 2000PricewaterhouseCoopersGesellschaft mit beschränkter HaftungWirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft[signed][signed]
(Wagener)(Kern)
WirtschaftsprüferWirtschaftsprüfer
159
Note on the allocation of lossesNote: this item does not form a part of thefinancial statements of the ECB. It is published in
the Annual Report for information purposes.Pursuant to Article 33.2 of the Statute of theESCB, a loss incurred by the ECB shall betransferred in the following order:(a)the loss may be offset against the general
reserve fund of the ECB;(b)following a decision by the Governing
Council of the ECB, any remaining lossshall be offset against the monetary
income for the relevant financial year in
proportion to and up to the amountsallocated to the NCBs in accordance with

Article 32.5;
1(c)in the event that such losses cannot be
offset in accordance with Article 33.2,the Governing Council has agreed thatany remaining loss should be funded as
follows;(i)any remaining loss may be offset in
the first instance by waiving a partof the original value of the ECB™sliabilities equivalent to the transfer of
foreign reserves in the balance sheetof the ECB. The maximum waivermay not exceed:the amount of unrealised losses
which arise on the foreign currency
and gold positions;an amount which would reduce the
aforesaid liability to below 80% of

its original value.(ii)any remaining loss may be offset
against a direct charge on income,apportioned in accordance with the
ECB™s capital key, accruing to
participating NCBs from nationalbanknotes in circulation, subject tothe limitation that no such direct
charge on any one NCB may exceedthat NCB™s income from nationalbanknotes.At its meeting on 16 March 2000 theGoverning Council of the ECB decided to
allocate the loss of the ECB for the yearending on 31 December 1999 as follows:1In accordance with Article 32.5 of the Statute of the ESCB, the
NCBs™ monetary income shall be allocated to the NCBs in
proportion to their paid-up shares in the capital of the ECB. The

Governing Council of the ECB decided for the financial years
1999 to 2001 to calculate monetary income by the application
of a reference rate to the liability base, which consists of all
deposit liabilities to credit institutions, current accounts, the

deposit facility, fixed-term deposits, deposits related to margin
calls, liquidity-absorbing repurchase agreements and liabilities of
participating NCBs arising from the issuance by the ECB of debt
certificates. The reference rate used is the latest available two-
week repo rate and is applied on a daily basis to the liability
base of each NCB to calculate the pool of monetary income.

Amounts of interest paid by an NCB on liabilities included within
its liability base are to be deducted from the amount of monetary
income to be pooled.19991998
(Loss)/Profit for the year(247,281,223)27,540,513
Withdrawals from/allocatedto general reserve funds27,540,513(5,508,000)
Transfer from monetaryincome pooled35,160,6760
Retained profit carried forward(22,032,513)Direct charge on NCBs184,580,0340

160AssetsBalance as atBalance as at
31 December 19991 January 1999
1Gold and gold receivables
116,61099,565
2Claims on non-euro area residents denominated in
foreign currency
2.1Receivables from the IMF71,74429,511
2.2Balances with banks and security investments,
external loans and other external assets182,803201,494
254,547231,005
3Claims on euro area residents denominated in foreign
currency14,4126,283
4Claims on non-euro area residents denominated in euro
4.1Balances with banks, security investments
and loans6,0508,941
4.2Claims arising from the credit facility under
ERM II00
6,0508,941
5Lending to financial sector counterparties of the euro area
5.1Main refinancing operations161,988143,696
5.2Longer-term refinancing operations74,99624,698
5.3Fine-tuning reverse operations06,680

5.4Structural reverse operations00
5.5Marginal lending facility11,4296,372
5.6Credits related to margin calls40426

5.7Other lending1,2763,641
250,093185,113
6Securities of euro area residents denominated
in euro23,51321,673
7General government debt denominated in euro
59,18060,126
8Other assets
81,89980,731
Total assets806,304693,437
Totals/sub-totals may not add up, due to rounding.Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Eurosystem as at 31 December 1999
(EUR millions)161
LiabilitiesBalance as atBalance as at
31 December 19991 January 1999
1Banknotes in circulation
374,976342,194
2Liabilities to euro area financial sector counterparties
denominated in euro2.1Current accounts
(covering the minimum reserve system)114,82684,428
2.2Deposit facility2,618973
2.3Fixed-term deposits01,886

2.4Fine-tuning reverse operations00
2.5Deposits related to margin calls1012
117,45487,299
3Debt certificates issued
7,87613,835
4Liabilities to other euro area residents denominated in euro
4.1General government57,53955,279
4.2Other liabilities3,0613,075
60,60058,354
5Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro
9,0489,972
6Liabilities to euro area residents denominated in
foreign currency927595
7Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in
foreign currency
7.1Deposits, balances and other liabilities11,8963,314
7.2Liabilities arising from the credit facility under
ERM II00
11,8963,314
8Counterpart of special drawing rights allocated by the IMF
6,5295,765
9Other liabilities
54,49358,070
10Revaluation accounts
106,62960,083
11Capital and reserves
55,87653,956
Total liabilities806,304693,437

162AnnexesECB Annual Report Ł 1999
164Glossary*Benchmark: in relation to investments, a benchmark is a reference portfolio or indexconstructed on the basis of the objectives for liquidity, risk and return of the investments. Thebenchmark can also serve as a basis for comparison of the performance of the actual portfolio.Bilateral procedure: a procedure whereby the central bank deals directly with one or only afew counterparties, without making use of tender procedures. Bilateral procedures includeoperations executed through stock exchanges or market agents.Capital transfers: these consist of (i) cross-border transfers related to the ownership of fixed
assets; (ii) cross-border transfers of funds linked to, or conditional upon, the acquisition or disposal
of fixed assets; and (iii) the cancellation, without any counterparts being received in return, ofcross-border liabilities by creditors. Capital transfers may be in cash or in kind (e.g. debtforgiveness).Central securities depository (CSD): an entity which holds securities and which enables
securities transactions to be processed by book entry. Physical securities may be immobilised by
the depository or securities may be dematerialised (i.e. so that they exist only as electronic
records). In addition to the safekeeping and administration of securities (e.g. services for issuanceand redemption), a central securities depository may incorporate clearing and settlement
functions.Collateral: assets pledged as a guarantee for the repayment of the short-term liquidity loans
which credit institutions receive from the central banks, as well as assets sold to central banks
by credit institutions as part of repurchase operations.Consolidated MFI balance sheet: the consolidated balance sheet of the 
Monetary Financial
Institutions (MFI) sector is obtained by netting out inter-MFI positions on the aggregated MFI
balance sheet (e.g. inter-MFI loans and deposits of money market funds with MFIs). It provides
information on the MFI sector™s assets and liabilities vis-à-vis residents of the 
euro area not
belonging to this sector (the general government and other euro area residents) and vis-à-vis non-
residents of the euro area. The consolidated balance sheet is the main statistical source for the

calculation of monetary aggregates and it provides the basis for the regular analysis of thecounterparts of M3.Convergence programmes: see stability programmes.Correspondent banking: an arrangement by which one bank provides payment and otherservices to another bank. Payments through correspondents are often executed throughreciprocal accounts (nostro and loro accounts), to which standing credit lines may be attached.Correspondent banking services are primarily provided across international boundaries, but are
also known as agency relationships in some domestic contexts. A loro account is the term used by
a correspondent to describe an account held on behalf of a foreign bank; the foreign bank wouldregard this account as its nostro account.Correspondent central banking model (CCBM): 
a model established by the EuropeanSystem of Central Banks (ESCB) with the aim of enabling 
counterparties to transfer eligible
assets as collateral in a cross-border context. In the CCBM, national central banks act as*The numbering of the Articles and Protocols follows that established by the Treaty as signed in Amsterdam.
165
custodians for one another. This implies that each national central bank has a securities account inits securities administration for each of the other national central banks (and for the EuropeanCentral Bank (ECB)).Counterparty: the opposite party in a financial transaction (e.g. any transaction with the central
bank).Credit institution: an institution covered by the definition contained in Article I of the First
Banking Co-ordination Directive (77/780/EEC), i.e. ﬁan undertaking whose business is to receivedeposits or other repayable funds from the public and to grant credit for its own accountﬂ.Credit to euro area residents: a broad measure of the financing of non-Monetary FinancialInstitution (MFI) euro area residents (including 
general government and the private sector)
provided by the MFI sector. It is defined as including (i) loans and (ii) MFI holdings of securities. Thelatter include shares, other equity and debt securities including money market paper issued by non-MFI euro area residents. As securities can be seen as an alternative source of funds, relative to
loans, and as some loans can be securitised, this definition provides more accurate information on
the total amount of financing provided by the MFI sector to the economy than a narrow definitioncomprising loans only.Currency in circulation: currency in circulation includes both banknotes and coins in circulation
that are commonly used to make payments. It includes banknotes issued by the Eurosystem and
by other Monetary Financial Institutions (MFIs)
 in the euro area (in Ireland and Luxembourg)
as well as the coins issued by the Eurosystem and by the central government. Currency incirculation included in M3 is a net concept, i.e. it refers only to banknotes and coins in circulation
that are held outside the MFI sector (as shown in the 
consolidated MFI balance sheet, implyingthat currency issued but held by MFIs Œ ﬁvault cashﬂ Œ has been subtracted). Currency in circulationdoes not include a central bank™s stock of own banknotes (as they are not issued), nor
commemorative coins that are not commonly used to make payments.
Current transfers: these consist of transfers which are not transfers of capital and which have a
direct impact on the level of disposable income of the euro area donor or recipient.Debt ratio: the subject of one of the fiscal convergence criteria laid down in Article 104 (2) of theTreaty. It is defined as ﬁthe ratio of government debt to gross domestic product at current marketpricesﬂ, while government debt is defined in Protocol No. 20 (on the excessive deficit procedure)
as the ﬁtotal gross debt at nominal value outstanding at the end of the year and consolidated between and
within the sectors of general governmentﬂ. General government is as defined in the
 European
System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95).Deficit-debt adjustment: the difference between the government deficit and the change in
government debt. Among other reasons, this may be due to changes in the amount of financial
assets held by the government, to a change in government debt held by other government

sub-sectors or to statistical adjustments.Deficit ratio: the subject of one of the fiscal convergence criteria named in Article 104 (2) of the
Treaty. It is defined as ﬁthe ratio of the planned or actual government deficit to gross domestic productﬂ
at current market prices, while the government deficit is defined in Protocol No. 20 (on theexcessive deficit procedure) as ﬁnet borrowing of the general governmentﬂ. General
government is as defined in the 
European System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95).
166Delivery versus payment system (DVP, or delivery against payment): a mechanism in asecurities settlement system which ensures that the final transfer of one asset occurs if, andonly if, the final transfer of (an)other asset(s) occurs. Assets could include securities or otherfinancial instruments.Deposit facility: a 
standing facility of the 
Eurosystem which 
counterparties may use to
make overnight deposits at a national central bank and which are remunerated at a pre-specifiedinterest rate.Deposits redeemable at notice: this category consists of saving deposits for which the holder
has to respect a fixed period of notice before he or she can withdraw his or her funds. In some
cases there is the possibility of withdrawing a certain fixed amount in a specified period or ofearlier withdrawal subject to the payment of a penalty. Deposits redeemable at a period of noticeof up to three months belong to M2 (and hence to M3), while those with a longer period of noticebelong to the (non-monetary) longer-term financial liabilities of the 
Monetary FinancialInstitutions (MFI) sector.
Deposits with agreed maturity: this instrument category consists mainly of time deposits with
a given maturity that may, depending on national practices, either not be convertible prior tomaturity or be convertible only subject to a penalty. It also encompasses some non-marketable
debt instruments, such as non-marketable (retail) certificates of deposit. Deposits with an agreedmaturity of up to two years are included in M2 (and hence in 
M3), while those with agreedmaturity over two years are included in the (non-monetary) longer-term financial liabilities of the
Monetary Financial Institutions (MFI) sector.
ECOFIN: see 
EU Council.Economic and Financial Committee:
 a consultative Community body set up at the start of
Stage Three, when the Monetary Committee was dissolved. The Member States, the 
EuropeanCommission and the
 European Central Bank (ECB)
 each appoint no more than two
members of the Committee. Article 114 (2) of the 
Treaty contains a list of the tasks of theEconomic and Financial Committee, including the review of the economic and financial situation of
the Member States and of the Community.Economic and Monetary Union (EMU): the 
Treaty describes the process of achieving
Economic and Monetary Union in the European Union in three stages. Stage One of EMU started in
July 1990 and ended on 31 December 1993; it was mainly characterised by the dismantling of all
internal barriers to the free movement of capital within the European Union. Stage Two of EMU
began on 1 January 1994. It provided for, inter alia, the establishment of the 
European MonetaryInstitute (EMI), the prohibition of monetary financing of and privileged access to financialinstitutions for the public sector and the avoidance of excessive deficits. Stage Three started on
1 January 1999, in accordance with the decision pursuant to Article 121 (4) of the Treaty, with the
transfer of monetary competence to the 
Eurosystem and the introduction of the 
euro.ECU (European Currency Unit): the ECU was a basket made up of the sum of fixed amounts
of 12 of the 15 currencies of the Member States. The value of the ECU was calculated as aweighted average of the value of its component currencies. The ECU was replaced by the euro on
a one-to-one basis on 1 January 1999.
Effective (nominal/real) exchange rates: nominal effective exchange rates consist of a
weighted average of various bilateral exchange rates. Real effective exchange rates are nominal167
effective exchange rates deflated by a weighted average of foreign, relative to domestic, prices orcosts. They are thus measures of price and cost competitiveness. The nominal effective exchangerate of the euro calculated by the 
European Central Bank (ECB) is a geometric weighted
average of the exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of 13 trading partners of the euroarea. The weights are based on trade in manufactured goods with the trading partners in the
period from 1995 to 1997, and capture third market effects. The real effective exchange rate forthe euro is calculated using consumer price indices (the Harmonised Index of ConsumerPrices (HICP) for the euro area and other EU Member States).Electronic money (e-money): an electronic store of monetary value on a technical device that
may be widely used for making payments to undertakings other than the issuer without necessarilyinvolving bank accounts in the transaction, but acting as a prepaid bearer instrument (see alsomulti-purpose prepaid card).EMU: see 
Economic and Monetary Union.EONIA (euro overnight index average): a measure of the effective interest rate prevailing inthe euro interbank overnight market. It is computed as a weighted average of the interest rates on
unsecured overnight contracts on deposits denominated in euro, as reported by a panel of
contributing banks.ERM II (exchange rate mechanism II): the exchange rate arrangement which provides the
framework for exchange rate policy co-operation between the euro area and EU Member States
not participating in the euro area from the start of Stage Three of Economic and MonetaryUnion (EMU). Membership of the mechanism is voluntary. Nevertheless, Member States with aderogation can be expected to join the mechanism. Currently, the Danish krone and the Greekdrachma participate in ERM II with a fluctuation band around the central rate against the euro of
±2.25% and ±15% respectively. Foreign exchange intervention and financing at the margins of the
standard or narrower fluctuation bands are, in principle, automatic and unlimited, with very short-term financing available. The European Central Bank (ECB) and the participating non-euro
area national central banks could, however, suspend automatic intervention if this were to conflict
with their primary objective of maintaining price stability.EU Council: an institution of the European Community. It is made up of representatives of the
governments of the Member States, normally the ministers responsible for the matters underconsideration (therefore often referred to as the Council of Ministers). The EU Council meeting inthe composition of the Ministers of Finance and Economy is often referred to as the ECOFINCouncil. In addition, the EU Council may meet in the composition of the Heads of State orGovernment. See also European Council.EURIBOR (euro interbank offered rate): is the rate at which a prime bank is willing to lend
funds in 
euro to another prime bank. The EURIBOR is computed daily for interbank deposits with
a maturity of one week and one to twelve months as the average of the daily offer rates of a
representative panel of prime banks, rounded to three decimal places.Euro: the name of the European currency adopted by the 
European Council at its meeting in
Madrid on 15 and 16 December 1995 and used instead of the generic term ECU (EuropeanCurrency Unit) employed in the 
Treaty.Euro area: the area encompassing those Member States in which the 
euro has been adopted as
the single currency in accordance with the Treaty and in which a single monetary policy is

168conducted under the responsibility of the Governing Council of the 
European Central Bank(ECB). The euro area comprises Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, theNetherlands, Austria, Portugal, Finland.Euro Banking Association (EBA): an interbank organisation intended to be the forum for
exploring and debating all issues of interest to its members and, in particular, matters pertaining tothe use of the euro and the settlement of transactions in euro. Within the EBA, a clearing
company (ABE Clearing, Société par Actions Simplifiée à capital variable) has been established withthe purpose of managing the Euro Clearing System as from 1 January 1999. The Euro ClearingSystem (Euro 1) is the successor system to the ECU Clearing and Settlement System.Euro central rate: the official exchange rate of the 
ERM II member currencies vis-à-vis theeuro, around which the ERM II fluctuation margins are defined.European Central Bank (ECB): the ECB is the centre of the 
European System of CentralBanks (ESCB) and the 
Eurosystem and has legal personality under Community law. It ensures
that the tasks conferred upon the Eurosystem and the ESCB are implemented either by its own
activities pursuant to the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank or through the national central banks.
European Commission (Commission of the European Communities): the institution of
the European Community which ensures the application of the provisions of the Treaty, takesinitiatives for Community policies, proposes Community legislation and exercises powers inspecific areas. In the area of economic policy, the Commission recommends broad guidelines foreconomic policies in the Community and reports to the 
EU Council on economic developments
and policies. It monitors public finances in the framework of multilateral surveillance and submitsreports to the Council. It consists of 20 members and includes two nationals from Germany, Spain,
France, Italy and the United Kingdom, and one from each of the other Member States. 
Eurostat isresponsible for the production of Community statistics.European Council: provides the European Union with the necessary impetus for its
development and defines the general political guidelines thereof. It brings together the Heads ofState or Government of the Member States and the President of the European Commission(see also EU Council).European Monetary Institute (EMI): the EMI was a temporary institution established at thestart of Stage Two of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)
 (on 1 January 1994). The two
main tasks of the EMI were (i) to strengthen central bank co-operation and monetary policy co-ordination and (ii) to make the preparations required for the establishment of the EuropeanSystem of Central Banks (ESCB), for the conduct of the single monetary policy and for thecreation of a single currency in Stage Three. It went into liquidation following the establishment of
the European Central Bank (ECB) on 1 June 1998.European Parliament: consists of 626 representatives of the citizens of the Member States. It is
a part of the legislative process, although with different prerogatives according to the proceduresthrough which EU law is to be enacted. In the framework of Economic and Monetary Union(EMU), the Parliament has mainly consultative powers. However, the 
Treaty establishes certain
procedures for the democratic accountability of the 
European Central Bank (ECB) to the
Parliament (presentation of the annual report, general debate on the monetary policy, hearings
before the competent parliamentary committees).169
European System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95): a system of uniform statistical definitions and
classifications aimed at achieving a harmonised quantitative description of the economies of theMember States. The ESA is the Community™s version of the world System of National Accounts

1993. The ESA 95 is a new version of the European system, implementation of which began in thecourse of 1999 in accordance with Council Regulation (EC) No. 2223/96.European System of Central Banks (ESCB): the ESCB is composed of the 
EuropeanCentral Bank (ECB) and the national central banks of all 15 Member States, i.e. it includes, in
addition to the members of the Eurosystem, the national central banks of the Member Stateswhich did not adopt the euro at the start of Stage Three of 
Economic and Monetary Union(EMU). The ESCB is governed by the Governing Council and the 
Executive Board of the
ECB, and, as a third decision-making body of the ECB, by the General Council.Eurostat: see 
European Commission.Eurosystem: comprises the 
European Central Bank (ECB) and the national central banks ofthe Member States which have adopted the euro in Stage Three of 
Economic and MonetaryUnion (EMU) (see also euro area
). There are currently 11 national central banks in theEurosystem. The Eurosystem is governed by the Governing Council and the 
Executive Boardof the ECB.Eurosystem™s foreign exchange liquidity position: this comprises the
 Eurosystem™s
foreign reserve assets 
and the Eurosystem™s other foreign currency claims and liabilities,including positions vis-à-vis euro area residents such as, for instance, foreign exchange deposits
placed with banking institutions resident in the euro area.Eurosystem™s foreign reserve assets: the reserve assets of the 
euro area consist of the
Eurosystem™s reserve assets, i.e. the reserve assets of the 
European Central Bank (ECB) and
the reserve assets held by the national central banks of the participating Member States. Reserve
assets must (i) be under the effective control of the relevant monetary authority, whether the ECB
or the national central bank of one of the participating Member States, and (ii) refer to highly liquid,marketable and creditworthy foreign (non-
euro) currency-denominated claims on non-residentsof the euro area, plus gold, special drawing rights and the reserve positions in the International

Monetary Fund of the participating national central banks.Executive Board: one of the decision-making bodies of the European Central Bank (ECB). Itcomprises the President, the Vice-President and four other members appointed by common
accord by the Heads of State or Government of the Member States which have adopted the euro.Fine-tuning operation: a non-regular open market operation executed by the 
Eurosystemmainly in order to deal with unexpected liquidity fluctuations in the market.
Foreign exchange swap: two simultaneous spot and forward transactions of one currency
against another. The Eurosystem may execute open market monetary policy operations in the
form of foreign exchange swaps where the national central banks (or the 
European CentralBank (ECB)) buy (or sell) euro spot against a foreign currency and at the same time sell it (or buy
it back) forward.Frontloading: the distribution of 
euro banknotes and/or coins to certain target groups
(e.g. banks, retailers, cash-in-transit companies, cash-operated machine industry, general public)
prior to 2002.

170Funds transfer system (FTS):
 a formal arrangement, based on private contract or statute law,
with multiple membership, common rules and standardised arrangements, for the transmission andsettlement of money obligations arising between the members.
General Council: one of the governing bodies of the 
European Central Bank (ECB)
. Itcomprises the President and the Vice-President of the ECB and the governors of all 15 EU nationalcentral banks.General government: consists of central, state and or local government and social security
funds, as defined in the 
European System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95)
.Governing Council: one of the governing bodies of the 
European Central Bank (ECB). Itcomprises all the members of the Executive Board of the ECB and the governors of the national
central banks of the Member States which have adopted the euro.Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP): the HICP is the measure of prices used bythe Governing Council for the purpose of assessing 
price stability. In order to fulfil the
Treaty requirement for a consumer price index constructed on a comparable basis, taking into
account differences in national definitions, the HICP was developed by the EuropeanCommission (Eurostat) in close liaison with the national statistical institutes and the EuropeanMonetary Institute (EMI)
 and later the 
European Central Bank (ECB).Interbank funds transfer system (IFTS): a funds transfer system
 in which most (or all)
direct participants are credit institutions.Interlinking mechanism: one of the components of the 
TARGET system. The term is used
to designate the infrastructures and the procedures which link domestic RTGS systems in order
to process cross-border payments within TARGET.Large-value payments: payments, generally of very large amounts, which are mainly exchangedbetween banks or between participants in the financial markets and usually require urgent and
timely settlement.Links between securities settlement systems:
 the procedures and arrangements between
two securities settlement systems for the cross-border transfer of securities through a
book-entry process.Longer-term refinancing operation: a regular 
open market operation
 executed by the
Eurosystem in the form of a 
reverse transaction. Longer-term refinancing operations areexecuted through monthly standard tenders and have a maturity of three months.
Loss-sharing rule (or loss-sharing agreement): an agreement between participants in a
transfer system or a clearing house arrangement regarding the allocation of any loss arising when
one or more participants fail to fulfil their obligations; the arrangement stipulates how the loss willbe shared among the parties concerned in the event of the agreement being activated.Lump-sum allowance: a fixed amount which an institution may deduct in the calculation of its
reserve requirement within the minimum reserve framework of the 
Eurosystem.M1, M2, M3: see monetary aggregates.171
Main refinancing operation: 
a regular open market operation executed by the
Eurosystem in the form of a 
reverse transaction. Main refinancing operations are conductedthrough weekly standard tenders and have a maturity of two weeks.
Maintenance period: the period over which compliance with 
reserve requirements is
calculated. The maintenance period for Eurosystem minimum reserves is one month, starting on
the 24th calendar day of each month and ending on the 23rd calendar day of the following month.Marginal lending facility: a 
standing facility of the 
Eurosystem which 
counterparties may
use to receive overnight credit from a national central bank against a pre-specified interest rate.
Monetary aggregates: a monetary aggregate can be defined as the sum of 
currency incirculation plus outstanding amounts of certain liabilities of financial institutions that have a high
degree of ﬁmoneynessﬂ (or liquidity in a broad sense). The narrow monetary aggregate M1 has
been defined by the Eurosystem as currency in circulation plus 
euro area residents™ (other than
central government) holdings of overnight deposits with euro area money-issuing institutions.
The monetary aggregate M2 comprises M1 plus deposits with an agreed maturity of up to two
years and deposits redeemable at notice of up to three months. The broad monetary aggregate M3includes M2 plus repurchase agreements, money market fund shares/units and money marketpaper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years. The 
Governing Council has
announced a reference value for the growth of M3 (see also reference value for monetarygrowth).Monetary Financial Institutions (MFIs): financial institutions which form the money-issuing
sector of the euro area. It includes the Eurosystem, resident credit institutions as defined in
Community law and all other resident financial institutions whose business is to receive depositsand/or close substitutes for deposits from entities other than MFIs and, for their own account (atleast in economic terms), to grant credit and/or invest in securities. The latter group consists

predominantly of money market funds. At the end of 1999, there were 9,443 MFIs in the euro area
(12 central banks, 7,906 credit institutions, 1,517 money market funds and 8 other financialinstitutions).Multi-purpose prepaid card: a stored value card which can be used for a wide range of paymentpurposes and which has the potential to be used on a national or international scale, but which may
sometimes be restricted to a certain area. A reloadable multi-purpose prepaid card is also knownas an electronic purse (see also electronic money (e-money)).Net international investment position (i.i.p.) (or net external asset or liabilityposition): the statistical statement of the value and composition of the stock of an economy™s
financial assets or financial claims on the rest of the world, less an economy™s financial liabilities to
the rest of the world.Net settlement system (NSS): a funds transfer system, the settlement operations of whichare completed on a bilateral or multilateral net basis.Open market operation: an operation executed on the initiative of the central bank in thefinancial markets involving one of the following transactions: (i) buying or selling assets outright
(spot or forward); (ii) buying or selling assets under a 
repurchase agreement; (iii) lending or
borrowing against underlying assets as collateral; (iv) the issuance of central bank debt
certificates; (v) the collection of fixed-term deposits; or (vi) 
foreign exchange swaps between
domestic and foreign currency.
172Outright transaction:
 a transaction whereby the central bank buys or sells assets up to their
maturity in the market (spot or forward).Overnight deposits: this instrument category comprises mainly those sight/demand deposits
which are fully transferable (by cheque or similar). It also includes non-transferable deposits that

are convertible on demand or by close of business the following day.Payment versus payment (PVP):
 a mechanism in a foreign exchange settlement system which
ensures that a final transfer of one currency occurs if, and only if, a final transfer of the othercurrency or currencies takes place.Price stability: the 
Governing Council has published a quantitative definition of price stability
in order to give clear guidance to expectations of future price developments. The Governing
Council defines price stability as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index ofConsumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area
 of below 2%. Reflecting the need for monetary
policy to have a forward-looking, medium-term orientation, price stability according to this
definition is to be maintained over the medium term. The definition delineates an upper bound for
the rate of measured inflation and, at the same time, the use of the word ﬁincreaseﬂ signals thatdeflation, i.e. prolonged declines in the level of the HICP, would not be deemed consistent withprice stability.Primary balance: government net borrowing or net lending excluding interest payments onconsolidated government liabilities.Quick tender: the tender procedure used by the Eurosystem for 
fine-tuning operations.Quick tenders are executed within a time frame of one hour and are restricted to a limited set of
counterparties.Realignment: a change in the central parity of a currency participating in an exchange rate systemwith a fixed but adjustable peg. In ERM II a realignment consists of a change in the 
euro central
rate.Re-denomination of securities: the denomination of a security is the currency in which the par
value of the security is expressed (in most cases, the face value of a certificate). Re-denomination
refers to a procedure through which the original denomination of a security, issued in national
currency, is changed into euro at the irrevocably fixed conversion rate.
Reference period: time intervals specified in Article 104 (2a) of the 
Treaty and in Protocol
No. 21 on the convergence criteria for examining progress towards convergence.
Reference value for monetary growth: the 
Governing Council assigns money a prominentrole in the conduct of its policy, implying that 
monetary aggregates and counterparts are
thoroughly analysed regarding their information content for future price developments. This issignalled by announcing a reference value for the growth rate of the monetary aggregate M3. Thereference value is derived in a manner which is consistent with and serves the achievement of theGoverning Council™s definition of 
price stability on the basis of medium-term assumptions
regarding trend real GDP growth and the trend in the velocity of circulation of M3. Substantial or
prolonged deviations of M3 growth from the reference value would, under normal circumstances,signal risks to price stability over the medium term. However, the concept of the reference valuedoes not entail a commitment on the part of the Governing Council to correct mechanistically
deviations of M3 growth from the reference value.
173
Reference value for the fiscal position: Protocol No. 20 of the Treaty
 on the excessive
deficit procedure sets explicit reference values for the 
general government deficit ratio
 (3% of
GDP) and the debt ratio (60% of GDP) (see also Stability and Growth Pact).Remote access (to an IFTS): the facility for a 
credit institution established in one country
(ﬁhome countryﬂ) to become a direct participant in an interbank funds transfer system(IFTS) established in another country (ﬁhost countryﬂ) and, for that purpose, to have a settlement
account in its own name with the central bank in the host country without necessarily havingestablished a branch in the host country.Repurchase agreement: an arrangement whereby an asset is sold while the seller
simultaneously obtains the right and obligation to repurchase it at a specific price on a future date
or on demand. Such an agreement is similar to collateralised borrowing, with the exception thatownership of the securities is not retained by the seller. The Eurosystem uses repurchase
agreements with a fixed maturity in its reverse transactions. Repurchase transactions areincluded in M3 in cases where the seller is a 
Monetary Financial Institution (MFI) and the
counterpart is a non-MFI resident in the euro area. According to the Regulation of the ECBconcerning the consolidated balance sheet of the Monetary Financial Institutions sector1 (ECB/
1998/16), 
repurchase operations (repos) are classified as deposit liabilities since they are not
marketable. However, repos are not included in M2, because repurchase transactions have ahigher degree of substitutability with regard to short-term securities than to deposits with an

agreed maturity or to deposits redeemable at notice.
Repurchase operation (repo): a liquidity-providing 
reverse transaction based on a
repurchase agreement.Reserve base: the sum of the balance sheet items (in particular liabilities) which constitute thebasis for calculating the reserve requirement of a 
credit institution.Reserve ratio: the ratio defined by the central bank for each category of eligible balance sheet
items included in the reserve base. The ratios are used to calculate reserve requirements.Reserve requirement: the requirement for institutions to hold minimum reserves with thecentral bank. In the minimum reserve framework of the Eurosystem, the reserve requirement of
a credit institution is calculated by multiplying the 
reserve ratio for each category of items in
the reserve base with the amount of those items in the institution™s balance sheet. In addition,
institutions are allowed to deduct a lump-sum allowance from their reserve requirement.
Reverse transaction: an operation whereby the central bank buys or sells assets under arepurchase agreement or conducts credit operations against 
collateral.RTGS (real-time gross settlement) system: a settlement system in which processing andsettlement take place on an order-by-order basis (without netting) in real time (continuously). Seealso TARGET system.Securities settlement system: a system which permits the transfer of securities either free of
charge or against payment.1OJ L 356, 30.12.1998, p. 7.

174Settlement agent: an institution that manages the settlement process (e.g. the determination ofsettlement positions, monitoring the exchange of payments, etc.) for transfer systems or otherarrangements that require settlement.Settlement risk: a general term used to designate the risk that settlement in a transfer system
will not take place as expected. This risk may comprise both credit and liquidity risk.Stability and Growth Pact: consists of two 
EU Council Regulations on the strengthening of
the surveillance of budgetary positions and the surveillance and co-ordination of economic policies
and on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure and of aEuropean Council Resolution on the Stability and Growth Pact adopted at the Amsterdam summiton 17 June 1997. It is intended to serve as a means of safeguarding sound government finances in
Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)
 in order to strengthen the conditions
for price stability and for strong sustainable growth conducive to employment creation. More
specifically, budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus are required as the medium-term
objective for Member States, which would allow them to deal with normal cyclical fluctuations
while keeping the government deficit below the 
reference value of 3% of GDP. In accordance
with the Stability and Growth Pact, countries participating in EMU will report stabilityprogrammes, while non-participating countries will continue to provide 
convergenceprogrammes.Stability programmes: medium-term government plans and assumptions provided by
participating Member States regarding the development of key economic variables towards theachievement of the medium-term objective of a budgetary position close to balance or in surplus as
referred to in the Stability and Growth Pact. Regarding budgetary positions, measures toconsolidate fiscal balances as well as underlying economic scenarios are highlighted. Stabilityprogrammes must be updated annually. They are examined by the European Commission and
the Economic and Financial Committee. Their reports serve as the basis for an assessment bythe ECOFIN Council, focusing, in particular, on whether the medium-term budgetary objective in
the programme provides for an adequate safety margin to ensure the avoidance of an excessive
deficit. Countries not participating in the euro area must submit annual convergenceprogrammes, in accordance with the Stability and Growth Pact.Standard tender: a tender procedure used by the 
Eurosystem in its regular 
open marketoperations. Standard tenders are carried out within a time frame of 24 hours. Allcounterparties fulfilling the general eligibility criteria are entitled to submit bids in standard
tenders.Standing facility: a central bank facility available to counterparties on their own initiative. The
Eurosystem offers two overnight standing facilities: the 
marginal lending facility and the
deposit facility.TARGET (Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross settlement Express Transfer)system: a payment system composed of one 
RTGS system in each of the 15 EU Member Statesand the ECB payment mechanism. The domestic RTGS systems and the ECB payment mechanism
are interconnected according to common procedures (Interlinking mechanism) to allow cross-border transfers throughout the EU to move from one system to another.
Treaty: refers to the Treaty establishing the European Community. The Treaty was signed inRome on 25 March 1957 and entered into force on 1 January 1958. It established the EuropeanEconomic Community (EEC) and was often referred to as the ﬁTreaty of Romeﬂ. The Treaty on175
European Union was signed in Maastricht (therefore often referred to as the ﬁMaastricht Treatyﬂ)on 7 February 1992 and entered into force on 1 November 1993. It amended the EEC Treaty,which is now referred to as the Treaty establishing the European Community. The Treaty onEuropean Union has been amended by the ﬁAmsterdam Treatyﬂ, which was signed in Amsterdam
on 2 October 1997 and entered into force on 1 May 1999.
176Chronology of monetary policy measures of the Eurosystem
22 December 1998The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the first main refinancing operation ofthe Eurosystem will be a fixed rate tender
offered at an interest rate of 3.0%, a level
which it intends to maintain for theforeseeable future. This operation will be
initiated on 4 January 1999, while theallotment decision will be taken on 5 January
1999 and settlement will take place on
7 January 1999. In addition, the first longer-
term refinancing operation will be announcedon 12 January 1999 (with a settlement date

of 14 January 1999) and will be conductedthrough a variable rate tender using the singlerate allotment procedure.The Governing Council furthermore decidesthat the interest rate for the marginal lending
facility will be set at a level of 4.5% and theinterest rate for the deposit facility at a levelof 2.0% for the start of Stage Three,

i.e. 1 January 1999. As a transitional measure,
between 4 and 21 January 1999, the interest
rate for the marginal lending facility will be
set at a level of 3.25% and the interest ratefor the deposit facility at a level of 2.75%.The Governing Council intends to terminate
this transitional measure following its meetingon 21 January 1999.
31 December 1998In accordance with Article 109l (4) of the
Treaty establishing the European Community,the EU Council, acting with the unanimity of
the Member States of the EuropeanCommunity without a derogation, upon aproposal from the European Commission and
after consultation of the ECB, adopts theirrevocable conversion rates for the euro,with effect from 1 January 1999, 0.00 a.m.

(local time).The ministers of the euro area Member States,the ECB and the ministers and central bankgovernors of Denmark and Greece decide, in acommon procedure involving the EuropeanCommission and after consultation of the

Monetary Committee, to fix the central ratesagainst the euro for the currencies participatingin the exchange rate mechanism which comes

into operation on 1 January 1999. Further tothis decision on the euro central rates, theECB, Danmarks Nationalbank and the Bank of
Greece establish by common accord thecompulsory intervention rates for the Danishkrone and the Greek drachma. A fluctuation
band of ±2.25% will be observed around theeuro central rate for the Danish krone. Thestandard fluctuation band of ±15% will be

observed around the euro central rate for theGreek drachma.7 January 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat for the two main refinancing operationsto be announced on 11 and 18 January 1999

respectively the same conditions will apply asfor the first such operation, which was settledon 7 January 1999, i.e. they will be fixed rate

tenders conducted at an interest rate of 3.0%.12 January 1999Following the decision of the GoverningCouncil of the ECB on 22 December 1998,
the ECB announces that the first longer-termrefinancing operations of the Eurosystem will
be conducted as variable rate tenders usingthe single rate method of allotment. With a
view to phasing in the longer-term refinancing

operations, the first such operation isconducted through three parallel tenderswith three different maturities, namely
25 February, 25 March and 29 April 1999.The ECB also announces that the intention isto allot an amount of 15 billion in each ofthese parallel tenders. For the subsequentlonger-term refinancing operations in the first
three months of 1999, the intention is to
allot an unchanged amount of 15 billion peroperation.177
21 January 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesto revert to the interest rates on the
Eurosystem™s two standing facilities which it
had set for the start of Stage Three, i.e. toset the interest rate for the marginal lending
facility at a level of 4.5% and that for thedeposit facility at a level of 2.0% with effectfrom 22 January 1999. Furthermore, it decides
that for the two main refinancing operationsto be settled on 27 January and 3 February
1999 respectively the same conditions will
apply as for the first three such operationssettled earlier in January, i.e. they will befixed rate tenders conducted at an interest
rate of 3.0%.4 February 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat for the main refinancing operations tobe settled on 10 and 17 February 1999 thesame conditions will apply as for the first
such operations settled earlier in the year,i.e. they will be fixed rate tenders conductedat an interest rate of 3.0%. In addition, the
interest rate on the marginal lending facilitycontinues to be 4.5% and the interest rate onthe deposit facility remains 2.0%.18 February 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decides thatfor the main refinancing operations to be settled
on 24 February and 3 March 1999 the sameconditions will apply as for the previous suchoperations settled earlier in the year, i.e. they
will be fixed rate tenders conducted at aninterest rate of 3.0%. In addition, the interestrate on the marginal lending facility continues
to be 4.5% and the interest rate on the depositfacility remains 2.0%.4 March 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat for the main refinancing operations tobe settled on 10 and 17 March 1999 the sameconditions will apply as for the previous suchoperations settled earlier in the year, i.e. theywill be fixed rate tenders conducted at an
interest rate of 3.0%. In addition, the interest
rate on the marginal lending facility continuesto be 4.5% and the interest rate on the
deposit facility remains 2.0%. The GoverningCouncil also decides that for forthcominglonger-term refinancing operations of the
Eurosystem the multiple rate method ofallotment will be applied (starting from the
operation with a settlement date of 25 March
1999) until otherwise indicated.18 March 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat for the main refinancing operations tobe settled on 24 and 31 March and 7 April
1999 the same conditions will apply as for
the previous such operations settled earlierin the year, i.e. they will be fixed rate tendersconducted at an interest rate of 3.0%. In

addition, the interest rate on the marginal
lending facility continues to be 4.5% and the
interest rate on the deposit facility remains
2.0%.8 April 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesto reduce the interest rate on the mainrefinancing operations by 0.5 percentage
point to 2.5%, starting with the operation to

be settled on 14 April 1999. In addition, it
decides to lower the interest rate on themarginal lending facility by 1 percentage point

to 3.5% and the interest rate on the deposit
facility by 0.5 percentage point to 1.5%, both
with effect from 9 April 1999.22 April 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancing
operations, the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility will remain unchanged at
1782.5%, 3.5% and 1.5% respectively. In addition,
the Governing Council announces that forthe longer-term refinancing operations to besettled during the next six months, the
intention is to continue to allot an amount of
15 billion per operation.6 May 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility and
the deposit facility will remain unchanged at2.5%, 3.5% and 1.5% respectively.20 May 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility and
the deposit facility will remain unchanged
at 2.5%, 3.5% and 1.5% respectively. TheGoverning Council also decides to change
the maturity of the longer-term refinancing
operation scheduled to be settled on30 September 1999. The redemption date of
this operation will be brought forward from30 December to 23 December 1999.Correspondingly, the longer-term refinancing
operation which was originally scheduled tobe announced on 27 December 1999 and tobe allotted and settled on 30 December 1999
will be announced on 21 December, allotted
on 22 December and settled on 23 December1999. The rescheduling of operations is
intended to alleviate the working proceduresfor financial market participants at the turnof the year.2 June, 17 June, 1 July, 15 July,29 July, 26 August, 9 September 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility will remain unchanged at
2.5%, 3.5% and 1.5% respectively.23 September 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancing
operations, the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility will remain unchanged at2.5%, 3.5% and 1.5% respectively.The ECB releases to the public the indicativecalendar for the Eurosystem™s tender
operations in 2000. It also announces that no
new main refinancing operation will beinitiated in the first week of the year 2000,

and that no such operation will mature duringthat week. For this reason the maturityof the main refinancing operation of
21 December 1999 will be lengthenedexceptionally to three weeks. To avoid two
main refinancing operations maturing on
12 January 2000, the maturity of the
operation of 30 December 1999 will also belengthened to three weeks. These steps are
taken to minimise any potential problem for
counterparties and for the financial marketwhich could result from the conduct and
settlement of a large operation directly afterthe transition to the new century.
7 October 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility and
the deposit facility will remain unchanged at2.5%, 3.5% and 1.5% respectively.21 October 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility and
the deposit facility will remain unchanged at2.5%, 3.5% and 1.5% respectively.It also decides that for the longer-termrefinancing operations to be settled on28 October 1999, 25 November 1999 and
23 December 1999, the intention is to allotan amount of 25 billion per operation. This179
amount is higher than the amount of 15billion allotted for all previous longer-termrefinancing operations conducted in 1999.This decision takes into account the intention
of the ECB to contribute to a smoothtransition to the year 2000.4 November 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesto raise the interest rate on the mainrefinancing operations of the Eurosystem by
0.5 percentage point to 3.0%, with effect fromthe operation to be settled on 10 November1999. In addition, it decides to increase
the interest rates on both the marginallending facility and the deposit facility by0.5 percentage point to 4.0% and 2.0%
respectively, both with effect from5 November 1999.18 November 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility and
the deposit facility will remain unchanged at3.0%, 4.0% and 2.0% respectively.2 December 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility and
the deposit facility will remain unchanged at3.0%, 4.0% and 2.0% respectively.The Governing Council also decides toconfirm the reference value for monetarygrowth, namely an annual growth rate of 4½%
for the broad monetary aggregate M3. Thisdecision is taken on the grounds that thecomponents underlying the derivation of the
reference value, namely the Eurosystem™s
definition of price stability (an annual increasein the HICP for the euro area of below 2%),
the estimate for the trend of real GDPgrowth (2% to 2½% per annum) and that for
the trend decline in M3 income velocity (½%to 1% per annum), have basically remained
unchanged. As before, the Governing Councilwill assess monetary developments in relation
to the reference value on the basis of a three-month moving average of annual growth
rates. The Governing Council also decides to
review the reference value henceforth on aregular annual basis. The next review willtake place in December 2000.With regard to the minimum reserve system ofthe Eurosystem, the Governing Council, after

reviewing new statistical evidence, decides to
increase from 10% to 30% the standardiseddeduction from the reserve base to be applied
to debt securities issued with an agreed maturityof up to two years and to money market paper.This decision shall take effect as from the
determination of the reserve requirement to befulfilled in the maintenance period starting on24 January 2000.15 December 1999The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancing
operations, the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility will remain unchanged at3.0%, 4.0% and 2.0% respectively.4 January 2000The ECB announces that on 5 January 2000
the Eurosystem will conduct a liquidity-
absorbing fine-tuning operation with same-day settlement. This measure aims atrestoring normal liquidity conditions in the
money market after the successful transition
to the year 2000.5 January 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility and
the deposit facility will remain unchanged at3.0%, 4.0% and 2.0% respectively.
18015 January 2000At the request of the Greek authorities, theministers of the euro area Member States,
the ECB and the ministers and central bankgovernors of Denmark and Greece decide,following a common procedure, to revalue
the central rate of the Greek drachma in theexchange rate mechanism (ERM II) by 3½%,with effect from 17 January 2000.20 January 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancing
operations, the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility will remain unchanged at3.0%, 4.0% and 2.0% respectively.It also announces that the Eurosystem intends
to allot an amount of 20 billion for each ofthe longer-term refinancing operations to beconducted in the first half of 2000. Thisamount takes into consideration the expected
liquidity needs of the banking system of theeuro area in the first half of 2000 and the
desire of the Eurosystem to continue to
provide the bulk of its refinancing of thefinancial sector through its main refinancingoperations.3 February 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decidesto raise the interest rate on the main
refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by0.25 percentage point to 3.25%, starting fromthe operation to be settled on 9 February
2000. In addition, it decides to increase theinterest rates on both the marginal lendingfacility and the deposit facility by 0.25
percentage point, to 4.25% and 2.25%respectively, both with effect from 4 February2000.17 February, 2 March  2000
The Governing Council of the ECB decidesthat the interest rates on the main refinancing
operations, the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility will remain unchanged at3.25%, 4.25% and 2.25% respectively.
16 March 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decidesto raise the interest rate on the main
refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by0.25 percentage point to 3.5%, starting fromthe operation to be settled on 22 March
2000. In addition, it decides to increase theinterest rates on both the marginal lendingfacility and the deposit facility by 0.25
percentage point, to 4.5% and 2.5%respectively, both with effect from 17 March2000.181
Documents published by theEuropean Central Bank (ECB)
This list is designed to inform readers about selected documents published by the EuropeanCentral Bank. The publications are available to interested parties free of charge from the
Press Division. Please submit orders in writing to the postal address given on the back of the
title page.For a complete list of documents published by the European Monetary Institute, please visitthe ECB™s website (http://www.ecb.int).Annual ReportﬁAnnual Report 1998ﬂ, April 1999.Monthly BulletinArticles published from January 1999 onwards:ﬁThe euro area at the start of Stage Threeﬂ, January 1999.

ﬁThe stability-oriented monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystemﬂ, January 1999.
ﬁEuro area monetary aggregates and their role in the Eurosystem™s monetary policy strategyﬂ,
February 1999.ﬁThe role of short-term economic indicators in the analysis of price developments in theeuro areaﬂ, April 1999.ﬁBanking in the euro area: structural features and trendsﬂ, April 1999.
ﬁThe operational framework of the Eurosystem: description and first assessmentﬂ, May 1999.
ﬁThe implementation of the Stability and Growth Pactﬂ, May 1999.

ﬁLonger-term developments and cyclical variations in key economic indicators across
euro area countriesﬂ, July 1999.ﬁThe institutional framework of the European System of Central Banksﬂ, July 1999.
ﬁThe international role of the euroﬂ, August 1999.
ﬁThe balance sheets of the Monetary Financial Institutions of the euro area in early 1999ﬂ,
August 1999.ﬁInflation differentials in a monetary unionﬂ, October 1999.
ﬁESCB preparations for the year 2000ﬂ, October 1999.
ﬁStability-oriented policies and developments in long-term real interest rates in the 1990sﬂ,November 1999.ﬁTARGET and payments in euroﬂ, November 1999.
ﬁLegal instruments of the European Central Bankﬂ, November 1999.
ﬁThe euro area one year after the introduction of the euro: key characteristics and changesin the financial structureﬂ, January 2000.
ﬁForeign exchange reserves and operations of the Eurosystemﬂ, January 2000.
182ﬁThe Eurosystem and the EU enlargement processﬂ, February 2000.ﬁConsolidation in the securities settlement industryﬂ, February 2000.Working Paper Series1ﬁA global hazard index for the world foreign exchange marketsﬂ by V. Brousseau and
F. Scacciavillani, May 1999.2ﬁWhat does the single monetary policy do? A SVAR benchmark for the European Central
Bankﬂ by C. Monticelli and O. Tristani, May 1999.3ﬁFiscal policy effectiveness and neutrality results in a non-Ricardian worldﬂ by C. Detken,
May 1999.4ﬁFrom the ERM to the euro: new evidence on economic and policy convergence among
EU countriesﬂ by I. Angeloni and L. Dedola, May 1999.5ﬁCore inflation: a review of some conceptual issuesﬂ by M. Wynne, May 1999.
6ﬁThe demand for M3 in the euro areaﬂ by G. Coenen and J.-L. Vega, September 1999.

7ﬁA cross-country comparison of market structures in European bankingﬂ by O. de Bandt
and E. P. Davis, September 1999.8ﬁInflation zone targetingﬂ by A. Orphanides and V. Wieland, October 1999.
9ﬁAsymptotic confidence bands for the estimated autocovariance and autocorrelation
functions of vector autoregressive modelsﬂ, by G. Coenen, January 2000.10ﬁOn the effectiveness of sterilized foreign exchange interventionﬂ, by R. Fatum,
February 2000.11ﬁIs the yield curve a useful information variable for the Eurosystem?ﬂ by J. M. Berk and
P. van Bergeijk, February 2000.12ﬁIndicator variables for optimal policyﬂ by L. E. O. Svensson and M. Woodford,
February 2000.13ﬁMonetary policy with uncertain parametersﬂ by U. Söderström, February 2000.
14ﬁAssessing nominal income rules for monetary policy with model and data uncertaintyﬂ
by G. D. Rudebusch, February 2000.Other publicationsﬁThe TARGET service levelﬂ, July 1998.
ﬁReport on electronic moneyﬂ, August 1998.
183
ﬁAssessment of EU securities settlement systems against the standards for their use in ESCB
credit operationsﬂ, September 1998.ﬁMoney and banking statistics compilation guideﬂ, September 1998.
ﬁThe single monetary policy in Stage Three: General documentation on ESCB monetary
policy instruments and proceduresﬂ, September 1998.
ﬁThird progress report on the TARGET projectﬂ, November 1998.
ﬁCorrespondent central banking model (CCBM)ﬂ, December 1998.
ﬁPayment systems in the European Union: Addendum incorporating 1997 figuresﬂ,
January 1999.ﬁPossible effects of EMU on the EU banking systems in the medium to long termﬂ,February 1999.ﬁEuro area monetary aggregates: conceptual reconciliation exerciseﬂ, July 1999.
ﬁThe effects of technology on the EU banking systemsﬂ, July 1999.
ﬁPayment systems in countries that have applied for membership of the European Unionﬂ,August 1999.ﬁImproving cross-border retail payment services: the Eurosystem™s viewﬂ, September 1999.
ﬁCompendium: collection of legal instruments, June 1998ŒMay 1999ﬂ, October 1999.

ﬁEuropean Union balance of payments/international investment position statistical methodsﬂ,November 1999.ﬁMoney and Banking Statistics Compilation Guide, Addendum I: Money market paperﬂ,November 1999.ﬁMoney and Banking Statistics Sector Manualﬂ, second edition, November 1999.
ﬁReport on the legal protection of banknotes in the European Union Member Statesﬂ,November 1999.ﬁCorrespondent central banking model (CCBM)ﬂ, November 1999.
ﬁCross-border payments in TARGET: A users™ surveyﬂ, November 1999.
ﬁPayment systems in the European Union: Addendum incorporating 1998 figuresﬂ,
February 2000.Information brochuresﬁTARGETﬂ, July 1998.
ﬁThe euro banknotes and coinsﬂ, July 1999.
ﬁTARGET: facts, figures, futureﬂ, September 1999.
184ANNUAL REPORT 1999                                                            EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK
ENECB EZB EKT BCE EKPANNUALREPORT1999