Economic Bulletin Issue 6 / 2015
2Contents  
Economic and monetary developmentsOverview 31 External environment 62 Financial developments 113 Economic activity 154 Prices and costs 205 Money and credit 246 Fiscal developments 29  Boxes1 Recent developments and outlook for non-oil commodity prices
 312  Liquidity conditions and monetary policy operations in the period 
 from 22 April to 21 July 2015
 333  The usefulness of TARGET2 transaction data for the analysis of 
 
the unsecured overnight money market 374 Publication of TARGET balances
 425  Revised trade weights for the effective exchange rates of the euro reflect 
 
the increasing importance of emerging market economies 456  A survey-based measure of slack for the euro area
 497  Recent developments in euro area food prices 528  Country-specific recommendations for fiscal policies under the 
 
2015 European Semester 55  A
rticles1 The state of the house price cycle in the euro area 582 The fiscal impact of financial sector support during the crisis
 74  Statistics S13Economic and monetary developments OverviewA review of recent data, new ECB staff macroeconomic projections and an interim evaluation of recent market fluctuations point to a continued, although somewhat weaker, economic recovery in the euro area and a slower increase 
in inflation rates compared with earlier expectations. The changed outlook is 
due to a considerable extent to external developments. While the world economy 
is gradually expanding, it remains on an uneven path. On the one hand, economic activity in advanced economies is being supported by low oil prices, continued accommodative financing conditions, a slower pace of fiscal consolidation and 
improving labour markets. On the other hand, the outlook has worsened in emerging market economies amid heightened uncertainty, as structural impediments and 
macroeconomic imbalances are restraining growth in some countries, while others are adjusting to lower commodity prices and less favourable external financing conditions. In parallel, inflationary pressures have been dampened by falling 
commodity prices.Renewed downside risks to the outlook for growth and inflation have also emerged as a result of the recent increase in volatility in financial markets. Two 
significant episodes of heightened tensions occurred over the summer. The first was 

associated with developments in Greece in late June and early July and had, overall, a relatively muted impact on financial markets. The second episode took place in the 
second half of August and was related to developments in China. It had a significant 
impact on stock and foreign exchange markets as well as on perceptions of risk. Overall, long-term nominal euro area government bond yields declined slightly 
between early June and early September. Euro area stock prices declined markedly, 
especially amid losses in the Chinese equity market in the second half of August 
and the related increase in global uncertainty. In this environment of increased risk 
aversion and weakness in emerging markets, the effective exchange rate of the euro 
has recently appreciated significantly.
Euro area real GDP grew in the second quarter of 2015 at a slightly slower pace 
than in the first quarter. The pace of growth in the second quarter was somewhat 
slower than expected. The moderation was due to weaker than expected domestic 
demand and was broad-based across countries. The latest survey indicators suggest 

that the pace of real GDP growth in the second half of 2015 will be similar to that 
recorded in the second quarter.
Looking further ahead, the euro area recovery is expected to continue, albeit at a somewhat weaker pace than previously anticipated. This reflects in particular 
the slowdown in emerging market economies, which is weighing on global growth and thus on demand for euro area exports. Domestic demand should be further supported by the ECB™s monetary policy measures and their favourable impact 
4on financial conditions, as well as by the progress made with fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. Moreover, lower oil prices should bolster households™ real 
disposable income and corporate profitability, providing additional support for private 
consumption and investment. At the same time, the necessary balance sheet 
adjustments in a number of sectors and the sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms are likely to dampen the pick-up in activity.
The September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area1 foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.4% in 2015, 1.7% in 2016 and 1.8% in 
2017. Compared with the June 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, 
the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised down, primarily due to lower 
external demand owing to weaker growth in emerging markets. In the Governing Council™s assessment, risks to the outlook for economic activity remain on the 
downside, reflecting in particular the heightened uncertainties related to the external environment. Notably, current developments in emerging market economies have the 

potential to further affect global growth adversely via trade and confidence effects.
Following an upward trend earlier this year, HICP inflation in the euro area has 
recently stabilised at low positive rates. According to Eurostat™s flash estimate, 
annual HICP inflation remained at 0.2% in August for the third consecutive month. 

While low energy prices have dampened inflation, this has been compensated for by higher increases in food and non-energy industrial goods prices. Recent indicators confirm a gradual strengthening in underlying inflation. HICP excluding food and 

energy is estimated to have increased from a trough of 0.6% at the beginning of the year to 1.0% in August.On the basis of the information available, annual HICP inflation rates will 

remain very low in the near term, mainly reflecting recent developments in energy prices. Towards the end of 2015, however, headline inflation is expected 
to rise, also on account of base effects associated with the fall in oil prices in late 
2014. Inflation rates are foreseen to pick up further during 2016 and 2017, supported by the expected economic recovery, the pass-through of past declines in the euro 
exchange rate and the assumption of somewhat higher oil prices in the years ahead 
as reflected in oil futures markets. However, this increase in annual inflation rates is 
currently expected to materialise somewhat more slowly than anticipated thus far.
The September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.1% in 2015, 1.1% in 2016 and 1.7% in 2017.
 In comparison with the June 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, the 

outlook for HICP inflation has been revised down, largely owing to lower oil prices. 
Taking into account the most recent developments in oil prices and recent exchange 
rates, there are downside risks to the September staff inflation projections.
The ECB™s monetary policy measures continue to be transmitted to lending 
conditions and remain supportive of broad money and credit dynamics. The targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and the expanded asset 
purchase programme (APP) have contributed to improvements in money and credit 1 See the article entitled ﬁSeptember 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro areaﬂ, 
published on the ECB™s website on 3 September 2015.5indicators. Banks™ funding costs stabilised at historical lows in the second quarter 
of 2015, and favourable lending conditions continued to support a gradual recovery in loan growth. In addition, divergences in bank lending rates across euro area countries have narrowed further. The overall annual flow of external financing to 
non-financial corporations is estimated to have stabilised in the second quarter of 2015, although the dynamics of loans to non-financial corporations remain subdued. Stronger growth of credit to general government and a continued gradual recovery of credit to the private sector are supporting broad money growth.The Governing Council judges it premature to conclude on whether recent economic and financial market developments could have a lasting impact 
on the achievement of a sustainable path of inflation towards its medium-term aim or whether they should be considered to be mainly transitory, and 
will continue to closely monitor all relevant incoming information. Based on its regular economic and monetary analysis, and in line with its forward guidance, 
the Governing Council decided at its meeting on 3 September to keep the key 
ECB interest rates unchanged and confirmed that the asset purchase programme continues to proceed smoothly. Looking ahead, the Governing Council will closely 
monitor the risks to the outlook for price developments over the medium term, focusing in particular on the pass-through of its monetary policy measures, as well as on global economic, financial, commodity price and exchange rate developments.The Governing Council emphasises its willingness and ability to act, if warranted, by using all the instruments available within its mandate and, in particular, recalls that the asset purchase programme provides 
sufficient flexibility in terms of adjusting the size, composition and duration 
of the programme. In the meantime, the Eurosystem will fully implement its monthly asset purchases of •60 billion, which are intended to run until the end of September 2016, or beyond, if necessary, and, in any case, until the Governing 
Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation which is consistent with its aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
The Governing Council reiterates the need to firmly implement its monetary policy decisions and to monitor closely all relevant incoming information as concerns their 
impact on the medium-term outlook for price stability.
61 External environment 
The world economy is gradually expanding, but remains on an uneven path. On the one hand, economic activity in advanced economies is being supported by low oil prices, continued accommodative financing conditions, waning fiscal consolidation and improving labour markets. On the other hand, the outlook has worsened in emerging market economies (EMEs) amid heightened uncertainty, as structural 
impediments and macroeconomic imbalances are restraining growth in some countries, while others are adjusting to lower commodity prices and tighter external financing conditions. Inflationary pressures are expected to remain restrained 
following the recent fall in oil prices and the still abundant global spare capacity.
Global economic activity and trade National accounts data and survey indicators point to modest and uneven 
growth in global economic activity in the second quarter.
 Economic activity has been sustained in advanced economies, with growth rebounding in the United States and United Kingdom, although it weakened 
significantly in Japan following a strong first quarter. 
The situation in EMEs is mixed. On the one hand, Russia is in a deep recession and survey data point to further weakness in Brazil. On the other hand, 
growth recovered in China in the second quarter and is expected to have remained resilient in non-euro area central and eastern European countries (CEECs). Surveys suggest that global manufacturing output has been subdued in recent months, but overall activity 
has been more robust. The global composite output 
Purchasing Managers™ Index (PMI), excluding the euro 
area, remained broadly unchanged in August compared 
to the previous month and in line with the average for the second quarter, indicating some resilience in 
global activity (see Chart 1). Looking further ahead the OECD™s composite leading indicators and the Ifo World 

Economic Climate Index point to the global recovery continuing at a modest pace.Commodity prices have fallen recently, providing 
additional near-term impetus to global demand. Having rebounded during the second quarter, Brent 
crude oil prices have fallen by more than 20% in the third quarter, although, 
according to the futures curve, markets continue to price in a gradual increase in oil prices for the coming years. The recent fall has mainly reflected supply 
developments. The oil market continues to be oversupplied, with OPEC producing 

above its target and shale oil production proving to be more resilient than expected. In addition, the market seems to be slowly pricing in the prospect of increased supply from Iran. However, moderating demand, particularly in EMEs, has also played a 
role. That is also consistent with factors underlying other commodity price declines
 Œ Chart 1Global composite output PMI(diffusion index)
35 40 
45 50 55 
60 20082009201020112012201320142015global excluding euro area global excluding euro area: long-term average advanced economies excluding euro area emerging market economies Sources: Markit and ECB calculations.Notes: The latest observation refers to August 2015. Emerging market economies are 
Brazil, China, India and Russia. Advanced economies are Japan, the United States and 
the United Kingdom.7over the past year, for example, metal prices have 
fallen substantially, which may also have reflected the 
less buoyant growth in EMEs (see also Box 1). Overall, the fall in oil prices since the middle of last year is expected to benefit demand in oil-importing countries, outweighing the impact on oil-exporting economies. As oil prices have fallen since the peak of 2014, headline inflation in advanced economies has dipped, 
boosting real disposable incomes. Retail sales growth has risen in advanced economies and oil importing EMEs compared with a year ago, while it dropped sharply in major oil-exporting countries (see Chart 2).Monetary policies remain accommodative and are contributing to favourable global financial conditions. Markets continue to price in a first interest rate increase in the United States in the next six months. In Japan, policy rates are expected to remain low over the next two years. Disinflationary trends have prompted further easing of monetary policy in China, India and several other (mostly oil-importing) EMEs in recent months, while Russia continued to normalise interest rates after the sharp hike during the financial turmoil of December last year. Among the major EMEs, only Brazil has witnessed an ongoing increase 
in policy rates, as inflationary pressures remain elevated amid substantial hikes in administered prices, sticky pricing behaviour and further depreciation of the currency. 
As of 11 August 2015 the People™s Bank of China reformed the way it sets the daily 
fixing of the exchange rate in order to give more room to market forces, which led to a 3% depreciation of the renminbi against the US dollar in the week following that decision. Over the past two months, long-term government bond yields in advanced 
economies have broadly stabilised after the sharp increase during May and early June. Despite the correction, rates are still close to the low levels observed at the end of 2014 and term premia remain compressed. Bond yields in EMEs have moved broadly in tandem with those of advanced economies. However, aggregate 
private portfolio inflows to EMEs have weakened somewhat, while further currency 
depreciation in some countries is likely to have increased the cost of dollar financing. Moreover, the recent losses and volatility in Chinese stock markets are leading to 
heightened uncertainty. If this persists, it may ultimately translate into a tightening in 
financial conditions, particularly for vulnerable EMEs.Looking ahead, global growth is expected to be driven by a sustained recovery in advanced economies. As the headwinds of private sector deleveraging and fiscal 
consolidation gradually recede, the recovery in advanced economies is expected to gain traction. Low oil prices, continued accommodative financing conditions, improving labour markets and confidence should support an improving outlook. 
In the United States, growth will be supported by stronger household spending following the boost to real incomes from lower oil prices, supportive financial conditions, continued strengthening of the labour and housing markets, moderating fiscal drag and the fading of household balance-sheet repair. However, the past 
Chart 2Retail sales(year-on-year growth, three-month average)36
91215
18
21
24
2730-6-4
-20
246
810
122008200920102011201220132014advanced economies (left-hand scale) EME oil-exporting countries (left-hand scale) 
EME oil-importing countries (right-hand scale) Sources: National sources, IMF and ECB calculations.Notes: The latest observation refers to June 2015. Advanced economies include the 

euro area, Japan, the United States and the United Kingdom. Oil-importing EMEs are 
China, Indonesia, Korea, Turkey and Mexico. Oil-exporting EMEs are Russia, Brazil, 

Colombia, Chile and South Africa.
8appreciation of the effective exchange rate of the US dollar will dampen export 
growth in the near term, while the decline in oil prices will weigh on energy sector investment. In Japan, growth is expected to resume in the second half of the year, as 
households benefit from the increase in real incomes provided by the lower oil price, and exports benefit from improving foreign demand and the past depreciation of the Japanese yen. In the United Kingdom, growth is expected to continue to expand at a relatively robust pace. Although fiscal consolidation efforts are expected to 
dampen growth, low energy prices and accelerating wage growth should support real 
disposable incomes and private consumption. The recovery in demand and easing 
credit conditions should also spur business investment.By contrast, the medium-term outlook for EMEs is mixed amid heightened uncertainty.
 Growth in several large EMEs has slowed markedly over the past four years and is expected to remain subdued in the medium term. In some countries, potential growth has slowed owing to structural impediments and macroeconomic imbalances. Other EMEs are adjusting to lower commodity prices, heightened 
political uncertainty and tighter external financing conditions. In China, growth rebounded in the second quarter. Recent reductions in policy rates, modest fiscal 
stimulus from the central government and efforts to loosen constraints on local 
government finances are expected to support demand. However, the recent stock 
market slump has heightened uncertainty about the outlook. Moreover, the Chinese 
political leadership has placed increasing emphasis on tackling financial fragilities and macroeconomic imbalances, which is likely to slow the pace of expansion in 
the medium term. CEECs outside the euro area are performing strongly, benefitting 
from strengthening domestic demand as improved labour market dynamics and the recent decline in oil prices are expected to support household consumption. On the other hand, the outlook for Brazil has deteriorated, as monetary and fiscal tightening are expected to act as a drag on investment and activity. In addition, supply-side 
bottlenecks and the need to tackle substantial macroeconomic imbalances and high inflation are holding back medium-term growth. Russia is also in the midst of a deep 
recession. Despite some easing of financing conditions since the turn of the year, 
funding costs remain elevated. Uncertainty is high and business confidence weak, while lower oil revenue is expected to entail a sharp fall in public expenditure.Sharp falls in imports in a few large EMEs have driven a moderation in global trade in the first half of 2015. Global imports (excluding the euro area) based on national accounts data fell by 0.2% in the first quarter, and available data point to 

continued weakness in the second quarter. Indeed, global merchandise trade data 

from CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis showed a 
 quarter-on-quarter decline in world imports of 0.9% in the second quarter. While 

imports of advanced economies and CEECs have been resilient during 2015, pronounced declines in a few major EMEs have driven the global aggregate. In the first quarter imports slumped in Russia, driven by falling domestic demand and exchange rate depreciation. Imports in China have also been weak in the first half of the year, again reflecting the moderation in domestic demand. In the near term global 

trade is expected to recover very gradually. At the same time, survey indicators point 
to rather moderate global trade growth. In particular, the global PMI for new export 
orders fell in July (see Chart 3). Looking further ahead, with the subdued outlook for 9EME imports expected to persist, world trade is expected to remain moderate and  global imports are not expected to grow faster than global GDP.
Overall, the global growth outlook continues to suggest a modest and uneven recovery.
 According to the September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic 
projections, for which the cut-off date for the financial 
and commodity price assumptions was 12 August, world (excluding the euro area) real GDP growth is 

projected to accelerate gradually from to 3.2% in 2015 to 3.8% in 2016 and 4.0% in 2017. Euro area 
foreign demand is expected to expand from 1.4% in 2015 to 3.3% in 2016 and 4.1% in 2017. Compared with the June 2015 Broad Macroeconomic Projection Exercise, this constitutes a downward revision to world growth, mostly reflecting the weaker than expected 
outlook across EMEs. Revisions to euro area foreign demand are more significant, as weak activity in EMEs is now judged to weigh more sharply on imports than previously anticipated.Risks to the outlook for global trade and activity remain tilted to the downside. Notably, current 
developments in EMEs have the potential to further 
affect global growth adversely via trade, financial and 
confidence effects. Some EMEs are also vulnerable 

to a shift in global risk sentiment, after a period of risk spread and volatility compression. Geopolitical risks also continue to weigh on the outlook, and increased tensions between Russia and Ukraine could have adverse implications for global growth.Global price developments Global inflation remains low following the sharp 
oil price declines. Annual consumer price inflation 
in the OECD countries remained unchanged in July, 

at 0.6%. Excluding food and energy, OECD annual 
inflation also remained stable, at 1.6% (see Chart 4). Headline inflation remained broadly unchanged at low levels in major advanced economies. Outside the OECD countries, broad disinflationary pressures persist 
in China and India. However, in Brazil and Russia, 
inflation has remained high, as currency depreciation has led to higher import prices.Chart 3World trade in goods
(three-month-on-three-month percentage changes; left-hand scale: percentage point contributions; right-hand scale: diffusion index)
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 -15.0 
-12.5 
-10.0 -7.5 
-5.0 -2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 20082009201020112012201320142015world trade (left-hand scale) world trade 1991-2007 average (left-hand scale) global PMI new export orders (right-hand scale) global PMI excluding euro area manufacturing (right-hand scale) Sources: Markit, CPB and ECB calculations.Note: The latest observation refers to August 2015 for PMI and June 2015 for world 

trade.Chart 4CPI inflation(year-on-year percentage changes)-202
4
6810
121416182008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 OECD countries China India Brazil Russia Sources: National sources and OECD.Note: The latest observation refers to July 2015.
10Looking ahead global inflation is expected to rise only gradually.
 In the short term the recent fall in oil and other commodity prices should dampen inflationary pressures further, but thereafter the negative contribution from the energy 
component should gradually diminish as the effects of past oil price declines begin 
to fade. At the same time, the upward slope of the oil futures curve implies some 
recovery in oil prices, which should increase the contribution of energy prices to headline inflation. However, it is expected that the projected slow pick-up in world 
economic activity will result in only a gradual reduction in spare capacity, and wage 

and cost inflationary pressures are expected to remain generally muted. 112 Financial developments
Long-term nominal government bond yields in the euro area declined slightly between early June and early September, following significant increases in previous 
months. These declines took place in an environment characterised by a weakening growth outlook for the global economy, falling oil prices and declining inflation-linked 
swap rates. Equity prices also declined amid higher levels of volatility, especially 
in the aftermath of the currency depreciation and large losses in the equity market in China in August. Uncertainty associated with developments in Greece, which 
peaked in late June and early July, had a somewhat stronger impact on stock 

markets than on bond and foreign exchange markets, but overall its financial impact was contained and temporary. The effective exchange rate of the euro appreciated 
markedly between early June and 2 September 2015.Two significant episodes of heightened tensions occurred during the review 
period, the first one being associated with developments in Greece in late June and early July. 
This episode overall had a relatively muted impact on financial markets. This can be seen, for example, in spreads of ten-year government bond 

yields in lower-rated euro area countries relative to the corresponding German yield, which widened only marginally during that period and quickly returned to their previous levels. At the peak of the turmoil, spreads vis-à-vis the German ten-year 
 Bund were up by a maximum of 35 basis points in most euro area countries. 
Implied bond market volatility, like other measures of risk, rose only moderately and 
temporarily during that period. However, developments in Greece had a somewhat 
more pronounced impact on equity markets, leading to increases in implied volatility 
and declining prices. Between 26 June and 7 July the Dow Jones EURO STOXX 
50 equity price index fell by more than 8%, with the implied volatility of that index increasing strongly. The euro weakened somewhat against the US dollar during that 
period.The second episode of heightened financial market uncertainty started around mid-August and was related to developments in China. This episode, unlike the former, had a significant impact on stock and foreign exchange markets as well as 

on perceptions of risk. The depreciation of the Chinese renminbi which started on 
11 August was followed by a period of sharp declines in Chinese equity prices and 

strong increases in global uncertainty. These developments, combined with rapidly 
declining oil prices, were regarded as a sign that the global economic outlook was weakening and weighed on international financial markets and implied volatility. 
Stock prices in the euro area fell by around 16% from 11 to 24 August, while ten-year 
AAA-rated euro area government bond yields declined by around 10 basis points 
over that period. These declines were probably also fuelled by the appreciation of the 
euro, amid the unwinding of carry trade positions (that are typically closed in periods of heightened uncertainty) in which the euro was used as a funding currency as well as by declining market expectations of an imminent increase in monetary policy rates in the United States. Lower than usual market liquidity Œ a result also of seasonal factors Œ may have exacerbated fluctuations in stock and bond markets.Ten-year 
AAA-rated euro area government bond yields declined slightly overall between early June and early September, to stand at very low levels. 
Initially, 
12the average of ten-year AAA-rated euro area sovereign yields increased further, from 
0.93% on 4 June to 1.08% on 10 June, thereby continuing the trend observed since mid-April. It then remained broadly stable until mid-July, possibly reflecting mixed 
data releases. It later declined, to stand at around 0.90% in early September. Euro 
area sovereign yield spreads against Germany declined slightly over the review period, amid some volatility during the episodes of heightened uncertainty. Implied 
bond market volatility remained overall stable, notwithstanding some temporary increases. EONIA swap rates mirrored the movements in  AAA-rated yields. EONIA swaps decreased most in 
the medium maturity segments while a small increase was recorded for the longest maturities (see Chart 5). In line with developments in bond yields, EONIA forward 
rates edged downwards up to the eight-year horizon 
over the review period, with a peak reduction of around 20 basis points at the four-year horizon (see Chart 6).The decline in nominal rates was mirrored in lower inflation-linked swap rates in July and August. An accounting decomposition of ten-year nominal 
EONIA swap rates into ten-year inflation-linked swap 
rates and, as a residual, ten-year real rates shows that around two-thirds of the fluctuations in nominal yields in June came from changes in the real rate, 
with one-third derived from the inflation-linked swap rate (see Chart 7). In July and August, by contrast, 
the two relative contributions changed significantly, 
with lower nominal yields being derived entirely from Chart 6EONIA forward curve
(percentages per annum)-0.50.00.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.52015201720192021202320252 September 2015after the Governing Council meeting on 16 July 2015
5 June 2015Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations.
Chart 5EONIA swap rates
(percentages per annum)-0.50.00.5
1.0
1.5
2.02.53.0Jan.Apr.20142015JulyOct.Jan.Apr.Julytwo-year EONIA swapfive-year EONIA swapten-year EONIA swapthirty-year EONIA swapSource: Thomson Reuters.
Note: The latest observation is for 2 September 2015.
Chart 7Euro area ten-year real, nominal and inflation-linked swap rates(percentages per annum)-2-10
12Jan.Apr.JulyOct.Jan.Apr.Julyten-year real swap (nominal minus inflation-linked swap)ten-year nominal swapten-year inflation-linked swap20142015Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations.
Notes: The ten-year real swap is derived from the ten-year nominal EONIA swap 


13lower inflation-linked swap rates. (See also Section 4 for additional evidence on developments in inflation expectations.)Corporate bond yields were resilient in the face 
of the various financial market tensions, although they increased somewhat over the review period. Overall, corporate bond yields relative to the average of AAA-rated euro area sovereign yields moved in line 
with developments in the perception of risk. Accordingly, 
they tended to rise in response to the uncertainty associated with developments in Greece in late June 
and early July and, after moderating slightly, they 
then increased again in the second half of August in 
connection with the increase in global uncertainty  (see Chart 8). Corporate bond yields rose by between  5 and 20 basis points from early June to early 
September, depending on the sector and rating class.
Spreads in asset classes other than public sector securities purchased under the expanded asset purchase programme (APP) Œ covered bonds and asset-backed securities (ABSs) Œ behaved in a broadly similar manner.
 However, while covered 
bond spreads were broadly unchanged overall over the review period, some increases were observed for discount margins on lower-rated ABSs.
Significant losses were recorded in euro area equity markets in both the financial and the 
non-financial sectors. Euro area financial and non-financial stock prices recorded overall declines of 8% 
and 10% respectively between early June and early September (see Chart 9). While losses associated with developments in Greece were recovered by mid-July, 
equity prices declined markedly following the increase in uncertainty about the global outlook in the second 
half of August. Unlike in the euro area, US financial and 
non-financial stock prices were broadly stable between early June and mid-July, evidencing the euro area-
specific origin of the turbulences during that period. US stock prices then recorded broadly twice as large losses 

as for the euro area from mid-July, amid a deteriorating 
global growth outlook. Implied equity market volatility rose by 8 and 10 percentage points in the euro area and the United States 
respectively over the review period.The EONIA stabilised between early June and early September amid gradual increases in excess liquidity.
 After gradually declining following the announcement 
of the expanded APP, the EONIA then stabilised, averaging -0.12% between early 
Chart 8Corporate bond yields in the euro area(percentages per annum)0.51.0
1.5
2.0
2.5Jan.Apr.20142015JulyOct.Jan.Apr.Julyfinancialsnon-financialsSources: iBoxx and ECB.Note: The latest observation is for 2 September 2015.
Chart 9Financial and non-financial sector stock price indices(1 January 2014 = 100)90100110
120130Jan.Apr.JulyOct.Jan.Apr.July20142015euro area financialseuro area non-financialsUS financialsUS non-financialsSource: Thomson Reuters.
Notes: Based on DataStream market indices. The latest observation is for 

2 September 2015.14June and 2 September amid gradual increases in excess liquidity. Those higher 
levels of excess liquidity were largely the result of APP purchases and the targeted 
longer-term refinancing operation allotted in June. Box 2 presents more detailed information on liquidity conditions and monetary policy operations. The three-month 
EURIBOR fixing, after turning negative for the first time in late April, continued to 
edge downwards, standing at -0.033% on 2 September. 

Box 3 provides further insights on the unsecured overnight money market developments since 2008 
using TARGET2 transaction data while Box
 4 briefly recalls what TARGET balances are and the factors 
behind their developments.The effective exchange rate of the euro appreciated by 4.8% between early June and 2 September. 
In bilateral terms, it appreciated by 2.0% against the US dollar (see Chart 10). The euro also appreciated 

against the pound sterling, the Swiss franc, the Swedish 
krona and the renminbi. Meanwhile, declining oil prices and depressed economic activity in Russia weighed on the Russian rouble, resulting in the euro appreciating by 30% against that currency. The euro also strengthened 
against the currencies of several other emerging market economies and commodity-exporting countries. By 
contrast, it depreciated against the Japanese yen and the Czech koruna. The Danish krone continued to trade 
close to its central rate within ERM II. Box 5 presents the recent update of the trade weights used for the effective exchange rates of the euro.
Chart 10Changes in the exchange rate of the euro against selected currencies(percentages)Croatian kunaIndian rupeeBrazilian realTaiwan dollarRomanian leuDanish kroneHungarian forintIndonesian rupiahSouth Korean wonTurkish liraRussian roubleSwedish kronaCzech korunaPolish zlotyJapanese yenSwiss francPound sterlingUS dollarChinese renminbiEER-38-20-100102030405060since 2 September 2014since 2 June 2015Source: ECB.Notes: Percentage changes relative to 2 September 2015. EER-38 is the nominal 
effective exchange rate of the euro against the currencies of 38 of the euro area™s most 

important trading partners.153 Economic activity
The economic recovery in the euro area has continued to gradually firm, although at a slower pace than previously anticipated. Euro area real GDP continued to grow in 
the second quarter of 2015, albeit at a slightly slower pace than in the first quarter.
 The latest survey indicators point to a broadly similar pace of real GDP growth in 
the second half of this year as in the second quarter. Looking further ahead, the 
recovery of economic activity is expected to continue. The low level of oil prices will bolster real disposable income, thus supporting private consumption and corporate profitability. In addition, the very accommodative monetary policy stance should 

further contribute to easing overall financing conditions and enhancing access to credit, which will encourage more business investment. At the same time, the growth 
trend is expected to be slightly weaker than previously anticipated, reflecting in particular the slowdown in emerging economies, weighing on global growth and thus on the demand for euro area exports. Against this background, the September 2015 

ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area foresee a somewhat weaker growth outlook compared with the June 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections. Euro area real GDP continued to grow in the second 

quarter of 2015, albeit at a slightly slower pace than in the first quarter.
 According to Eurostat™s flash 
estimate, real GDP rose by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, 
in the second quarter of 2015, down from 0.4% in the first quarter (see Chart 11). This outturn in growth 

developments was somewhat lower than expected in the June 2015 Eurosystem staff projections. Although 
no breakdown was available by the cut-off date for this 
issue of the Economic Bulletin, available information suggests that private consumption and net trade made positive contributions to growth, with the latter reflecting gains in euro area export market shares on the back 
of the supportive euro exchange rate. In contrast, investment and changes in inventories are likely to have made a negative contribution to growth in the second quarter.
Indicators for business confidence point to a similar pace of growth in the near term as in the second quarter.
 Survey data available up to August 

signal ongoing moderate growth in the near term. For instance, both the European Commission™s Economic Sentiment Indicator (ESI) 
 
and the composite output Purchasing Managers™ Index (PMI) improved slightly 
between the second quarter of 2015 and the first two months of the third quarter. 
 In addition, both indicators stood in July and August above their respective long-
 term average levels. While both the ESI and the PMI rose in August, business 

confidence declined in the capital and intermediate goods sectors, reflecting in 
part a weaker assessment of export order book levels amid a deterioration in the Chart 11
Euro area real GDP and its composition
(quarter-on-quarter percentage changes and quarter-on-quarter percentage contributions)-4-3
-2
-10
1220082009201020112012201320142015changes in inventoriesnet exportsprivate consumptiongross fixed capital formationgovernment consumptionGDPSources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.

estimate.16global growth outlook. Whereas slower global trade dampens the euro area growth momentum, the past depreciation of the euro and low interest rates are likely to support business investment, while favourable labour market developments and lower energy prices should encourage private consumption in the near term. The assessment of a slower economic recovery is reflected in the September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area.1 The economic recovery in the euro area is projected 
to gradually broaden over the next two years, although being slower than previously anticipated, reflecting in particular the slowdown in emerging market economies. Positive contributions to growth are expected from domestic and, to a lesser extent than before, external demand. The ECB™s monetary policy measures should 

further support activity in the near and medium term, through a variety of channels. Bank lending rates are expected to remain at historical low levels and aggregate demand, notably fixed capital formation, is expected to benefit from the very accommodative 
monetary policy stance. At the same time, the 
sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms and the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors are likely to continue to weigh on growth. According to the September 2015 ECB staff 
macroeconomic projections for the euro area, annual real GDP in the euro area is expected to increase 
by 1.4% in 2015, 1.7% in 2016 and 1.8% in 2017 (see Chart 12). Private consumption growth, which has been the main driver of growth for the past year, is likely 
to have lost some of its momentum recently. 
For instance, combined retail sales and new passenger car registrations for the euro area grew by 0.3%, quarter on 
quarter, in the second quarter of 2015, down from 1.3% 
in the first quarter. While consumption probably slowed 
in the second quarter, the European Commission™s 
indicator on consumer confidence for the euro area, which provides a reasonably good picture of trend 
developments in private consumption, stood in August 
above its long-term average level and points to a continued growth momentum (see Chart 13).1 See ﬁSeptember 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro areaﬂ (
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecbstaffprojections201509.en.pdf?373c7ff1a4072123c81757486566b3f2).Chart 12Euro area real GDP (including projections)
(quarter-on-quarter percentage changes)-3.5-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.5
-1.0
-0.50.0
0.5
1.0
1.52008200920102011201220132014201520162017Sources: Eurostat and the article entitled ﬁSeptember 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro areaﬂ, published on the ECB™s website on 3 September 2015. 

Notes: Working day-adjusted data. The ranges shown around the central projections 
are based on the differences between actual outcomes and previous projections carried 

out over a number of years. The width of the ranges is twice the average absolute value 
of these differences. The method used for calculating the ranges, involving a correction 
for exceptional events, is explained in ﬁNew procedure for constructing Eurosystem and ECB staff projection rangesﬂ, ECB, December 2009.
Chart 13Euro area private consumption and consumer confidence(year-on-year percentage changes; mean-adjusted)-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.01.52.0200720082009201020112012201320142015real private consumptionconsumer confidenceSources: Eurostat, European Commission and ECB calculations.17Looking ahead, private consumption growth is expected to remain the key driver of the pick-up in activity.
 Private consumption should continue to benefit from the favourable impact of the decline in energy prices on real disposable income. Thereafter, wage income is expected to pick up, on the back of steady employment 
growth and accelerating nominal compensation per employee. Easing financing conditions as well as low financing costs, reinforced by the ECB™s non-standard 
measures, should further support private consumption.Euro area total investment growth is likely to have contracted in the second quarter of this year.
 In the first quarter investment was supported by improving demand, benign financing conditions, the mild winter and temporary fiscal incentives in some countries. In the second quarter of 2015 euro area total investment growth is expected to have contracted, as dynamics in industrial production of capital goods decelerated and capacity utilisation in the manufacturing industry was broadly unchanged. 
With regard to construction investment, construction production growth has slowed and confidence indicators remain at levels associated with contraction, pointing to weak growth in the second quarter.
The pick-up in business investment may be slightly slower than previously thought, but remains a driver of the recovery.
 Survey data for the capital goods sector suggest broadly stabilising or slightly weakening confidence and lower production 
expectations up to August (see Chart 14). The 
deterioration in the external environment is also weighing on the short-term outlook for investment. Nevertheless, looking ahead, business investment should progressively recover in an environment of very accommodative monetary policy, easing credit supply 
conditions, stronger profit mark-ups, strengthening 
demand and replacement needs. Construction investment is expected to gradually recover in the second half of 2015. Following the end of a protracted adjustment period, construction 
investment should be supported by very benign financing conditions and growth in household disposable income. The progress in housing market 

adjustments in some countries as signalled by a turnaround in building permits and house prices will also boost residential investment over time. Owing to the weaker external environment, expectations for export growth have been scaled down. The growth of euro area exports of goods and services moderated somewhat in the first quarter of 
2015. Although global growth slowed down significantly, 
Chart 14Euro area capital goods production and investment confidence(year-on-year percentage changes; net percentage balance; index)010
20
30
40
506070-50-40
-30
-20-10010
2020082009201020112012201320142015industrial production of capital goods (left-hand scale)
European Commission™s capital goods sector confidence (left-hand scale)PMI capital goods production (right-hand scale)
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission and Markit.Chart 15Euro area export market shares(total euro area exports of goods as a share of total world merchandise exports)2426
28
303234
363825.425.625.826.026.226.4
26.626.8Dec.Feb.Apr.June2014201520022004200620082010201220142016export market sharesSources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis and ECB calculations.
18trade in goods data for the second quarter of 2015 point to a pick-up in goods export growth, indicating gains in euro area export market shares in the first half of 2015, partly due to the supportive euro exchange rate (see Chart 15). These developments reflect an increase 
in exports to the United States and Asia (excluding 
China), while exports to China and Russia remained subdued (see Chart 16). Looking ahead, however, export growth is projected 
to fall well short of its pre-crisis pace, reflecting both 

a moderation in global demand and lower global trade 
elasticity to growth. Euro area imports are expected to 
continue to further strengthen over the medium term in 
line with the recovery in domestic demand. As a result, 
net exports are expected to make a broadly neutral 

contribution to real GDP growth over the next two years. 
Euro area labour markets are continuing to improve gradually.
 Headcount employment (see Chart 17) increased moderately, rising by 0.1% quarter on quarter 
in the first quarter of 2015 (the latest period for which data are available). At the sectoral level, employment 
growth was led by a rebound in construction employment. At the same time, services sector 
employment growth registered a further slowdown for 
the fourth consecutive quarter. Despite the increase 
in total employment, total hours worked decreased slightly in the first quarter, reflecting a decrease in hours 
worked per person employed. Survey results indicate that employment continued to improve in the second quarter of 2015. These indicators also point to some 
further improvements in labour market conditions in 
both industry and services in the second quarter of 2015 and a slight decline in construction. Unemployment continues to recede gradually from elevated levels. The euro area unemployment rate 
declined to 11.1% in the second quarter of 2015, from 
11.2% in the first quarter. In July the unemployment 
rate fell further to 10.9%. The ongoing decline in the 

unemployment rate is visible across all groups of workers (youth workers, adult workers, males and females) and across most euro area economies; nevertheless, substantial differences remain at the age 
group and country level. Looking ahead, euro area labour markets are expected to improve further 
over the short and medium term. Employment growth is expected to accelerate somewhat over the coming quarters, on the back of the economic recovery. 
 Chart 16Extra-euro area export volumes of goods to major trading partners(three-month-on-three-month percentage changes; percentage point contributions)-2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 MayAug.Nov.Feb.May20142015United StatesChinaAsia excluding ChinaRussianon-euro area Europe excluding Russia

Latin America
othertotalSources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Notes: ﬁNon-euro area Europeﬂ also includes some non-EU countries (e.g. Norway, 

Switzerland and Turkey).
Chart 17Euro area employment, PMI employment expectations and unemployment(quarter-on-quarter growth; index; percentage of labour force)67
8
9
10
11121413-1.0-0.8
-0.6
-0.4-0.20.00.2
0.4
0.620052006200720082010201220142009201120132015employment (left-hand scale)PMI employment expectations (left-hand scale)
unemployment rate (right-hand scale)Sources: Eurostat, Markit and ECB calculations.Note: The PMI is expressed as deviations from 50 divided by 10.
19As a consequence, the euro area unemployment rate is expected to decline further as the recovery broadens. The risks surrounding the economic outlook for the euro area remain on the downside. They reflect in particular heightened uncertainties related to the external environment. Notably, developments in emerging market economies have the 

potential to further adversely affect global growth via trade and confidence effects. 
204 Prices and costs
HICP inflation has recently stabilised at low, positive levels. On the basis of the 
information available and current oil futures prices, annual HICP inflation rates 
will remain very low in the near term. Annual HICP inflation is expected to rise 
towards the end of the year, also on account of base effects associated with the 
fall in oil prices in late 2014. Inflation rates are foreseen to pick up further during 2016 and 2017, supported by the expected economic recovery, the pass-through 
of past declines in the euro exchange rate and the 
assumption of somewhat higher oil prices in the years 
ahead as currently reflected in oil futures markets. The September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.1% 
in 2015, 1.1% in 2016 and 1.7% in 2017. In comparison with the June 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections, the outlook for HICP inflation has been 
revised down, largely owing to lower oil prices.HICP inflation has recently stabilised at low, positive 
rates, following the rebound from the negative rates 
seen earlier this year (see Chart 18). According to 
Eurostat™s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 
0.2% in August, unchanged from July and June. This 
recent stabilisation reflects two sets of offsetting factors 
(see Chart 19). On the one hand, the renewed decline in 

oil prices has driven down energy inflation. On the other 
hand, HICP inflation excluding energy and food has 
edged up somewhat over the past few months, driven 
by non-energy industrial goods inflation, while services 
inflation has remained broadly stable. Furthermore, in 
August food inflation picked up substantially on the back 
of a higher contribution from unprocessed food prices, 

while processed food inflation remained broadly stable, 
dampened by dairy prices.Energy and food price inflation have reinforced the pattern of euro area inflation in recent quarters. Energy price inflation has been negative since July 2014, when oil prices started to decline sharply. 
After peaking in mid-June 2014, the price of crude oil 
fell in euro terms by around 50% until January. On the 
back of rising oil prices following this trough in early 2015, energy price inflation started to pick up during the first half of this year. However, since July oil prices have 
seen a renewed downward trend, exerting downward pressure on energy price inflation. Similarly, the 
contribution from food price inflation declined markedly 
in 2014 and has rebounded somewhat since the start Chart 18Euro area HICP inflation (including projections)
(annual percentage changes)-1 0 1 
2 3 4 
5 2008200920102011201220132014201520162017Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.
Chart 19Contribution of components to euro area headline HICP inflation
(annual percentage changes; percentage point contributions)-2-1012 
3 
4 52008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015non-energy industrial goods services food energy HICP Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations. 
21of this year, supported by significant base effects. Nevertheless, food price inflation 
remains relatively low by historical standards (see Box 7).Recent indicators point to a gradual strengthening 
in underlying inflation. HICP inflation excluding 
food and energy (a measure of underlying inflation) 
remained stable at 1.0% in August. Most other 
indicators of underlying inflation, looking at the broad set presented in Box 4 of the previous issue of the Economic Bulletin,1 continued to post higher levels in July 2015 than early this year (see Chart 20). The 

pass-through of the euro™s strong depreciation between 
May 2014 and April 2015 to non-energy consumer 
prices and the continued recovery in domestic demand in the euro area should provide the impetus for a further pick-up in underlying inflation. However, it is still 
premature to conclude that underlying inflation is on an 
upward trend, as the indirect effects of the declines in 
oil and non-oil commodity prices and low global inflation could temporarily exert renewed downward pressure. The recent appreciation of the euro could also reduce some of the upward impact of the euro™s previous 

strong depreciation.The effects of the exchange rate depreciation can increasingly be seen in the rise in goods inflation. Non-energy industrial goods inflation recorded a broad-based rise from -0.1% in February 2015 to 0.6% in August. The upward trend reflects the pass-through 
of the marked increases in import prices for non-food consumer goods, which are related to the depreciation of the euro and the rise in the consumption of durable 
goods observed over recent quarters.The impact of the weaker euro on domestic pipeline pressures should become more evident over the coming quarters. Whereas extra-euro area import prices remained at elevated levels (see Chart 21), the domestic sources of pipeline price pressures remain weak. Indeed, pipeline pressures for food prices point to a modest dynamic along the price chain, while the annual rate of change in producer prices for non-food 
consumer goods was 0.2% in July, posting a small 
increase for the second consecutive month. Survey indicators have weakened recently. The Purchasing 
Managers™ Index (PMI) for non-food input prices in the 
1 See the box entitled ﬁHas underlying inflation reached a turning point?ﬂ, 
Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB, July 2015.Chart 20Measures of underlying inflation(annual percentage changes)010
20
3040506070
80900.00.51.0
1.52.02.53.03.54.04.520082009201020112012201320142015range of underlying inflation measuresHICP excluding food and energymeasure based on a dynamic factor modeldiffusion index (right-hand scale)Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Notes: In the range of underlying measures, the following have been considered: HICP 

excluding energy; HICP excluding unprocessed food and energy; HICP excluding 

energy and food; trimmed mean (10%); trimmed mean (30%); the median of the HICP; 
and the measure based on the dynamic factor model. The diffusion index is calculated 

as the share of individual HICP items which has seen an increase in the annual rate 

of change over the past three months. The latest observations are for August 2015 for 


Chart 21Producer prices for non-food consumer goods and extra-euro area import prices(annual percentage changes)32
1
0-1
-2-3464
2
0-2
-4
-682008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Producer Price Index Œ non-food consumer goods (left-hand scale)extra-euro area import prices (total industry excluding energyand construction, right-hand scale) Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.
Note: The latest observations are for July 2015 (Producer Price Index) and June 2015 

(import prices).22retail sector declined further in August, interrupting the upward movement observed 
until June. Although the increase in the annual rate of change in producer prices for 
non-food consumer goods has been subdued, the recent upturn should continue as the pass-through of the strong depreciation of the euro gains further traction.Domestic price pressures have stabilised for the time being. The GDP deflator, 
which is indicative of domestic inflationary pressures, increased marginally in the first quarter of 2015, reflecting continued weak labour cost developments and a moderate strengthening in profit margins. Growth in unit labour costs decreased slightly in the first quarter of 2015 as productivity grew at a stronger rate than compensation per employee. Profit growth (measured in terms of gross operating surplus) strengthened 

somewhat, reflecting the impact of the ongoing improvement in real GDP growth and 
a pick-up in the rate of growth in profit per unit of output.The high level of economic slack continues to depress services price inflation. The annual rate of services price inflation has hovered just above 1.0% in recent months. Most of the fluctuations around this level reflect the impact of travel-related items amid ongoing subdued developments in both wage growth and profit margins. The weakness in wage and profit margin growth could be attributed to a number 
of factors, including the high level of economic and labour market slack and higher wage and price flexibility in some countries following structural reforms in labour and product markets over recent years.Market-based measures of inflation expectations 
have recently declined, following a continuous upward trend since January, while survey-based 
measures have remained relatively stable. The upward trend in inflation expectations signalled by 
inflation-linked swaps since early 2015 came to a 
halt in late June. Overall, long-term forward inflation-linked swap rates rose by about 0.4 percentage point in the first six months of 2015. Between late June and early September, these rates declined amid signs of a 
moderation in global economic activity and decreasing commodity prices. However, other factors may also 
have contributed to the fall, such as low levels of 
market liquidity during the summer months and lower inflation risk premia incorporated in the inflation-linked swap rates. The five-year inflation rate five years 
ahead declined by 15 basis points between early July and 2 September, reaching 1.7% on this date 

(see Chart 22). Over the same period, short to  medium-term inflation swap rates decreased more markedly than the longer-term rates. Survey-based Chart 22Market-based measures of inflation expectations(annual percentage changes)0.51.0
1.5
2.02.53.020142015Jan.Apr.JulyOct.Jan.Apr.JulyOct.one-year rate two years ahead one-year rate four years ahead one-year rate nine years ahead 
five-year forward five years ahead inflation-linked swap rate ten-year spot inflation rate Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations. 
Note: The latest observation is for 2 September 2015.
23measures of inflation expectation have remained relatively stable so far and continue to suggest that inflation exceptation will return to a level below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term (see Chart 23).Overall, HICP inflation for the euro area is projected 
to rise from the end of 2015 (see Chart 18). On the basis of the information available in mid-August,  the September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic 

projections for the euro area forsee HICP inflation at 
an average of 0.1% in 2015, rising to 1.1% in 2016 and 
1.7% in 2017.2 The initial pick-up is mainly related to 
base effects due to past falls in oil prices. In 2016 and 
2017 headline inflation is envisaged to rise significantly as further reductions in economic and labour market slack gradually push up underlying inflation. Moreover, 
rising external price pressures in view of the protracted exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices and upward effects from the assumed rise in energy and 

non-energy commodity prices, combined with strong upward base effects from the recent oil price declines, 
will contribute to higher inflation. Compared with the June 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projection exercise, the outlook for 

HICP inflation has been revised downwards over the whole projection horizon, 

but only marginally for 2017. The downward revision mainly reflects the direct and 
indirect effects of the lower oil prices. 
Taking into account the most recent developments in oil prices and recent 
exchange rates, there are downside risks to the September 2015 ECB staff inflation projections. Since the cut-off date for the technical assumptions in the 
September projections, oil prices have declined, while the effective exchange rate 

of the euro has strengthened, partly in connection with the financial turmoil in some emerging market economies.The recovery in house prices is relatively broad-based, although house price growth remains heterogeneous across euro area countries. The ECB™s 
residential property price indicator for the euro area continues to increase at a 
relatively muted pace, rising by 1.0% (year-on-year) in the first quarter of 2015. House price growth in the euro area as a whole is expected to strengthen further in the period ahead, reflecting improving prospects for households™ income and 
employment, favourable financing conditions and the correction of previous overvaluations of house prices.32 See the article entitled ﬁSeptember 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro areaﬂ, 
published on the ECB™s website on 3 September 2015.3 See the article entitled ﬁThe state of the house price cycle in the euro areaﬂ in this issue of the 

Economic Bulletin.Chart 23Survey-based measures of inflation expectations(annual percentage changes)-1.03.02.52.01.51.00.5
0.0-0.5realised HICP inflation SPF (Q3 2015) Consensus Economics Forecast 2014 20122016 2018 2020Sources: Eurostat, Reuters, ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters, ECB calculations and Consensus Economics. 



ahead. Consensus Economics forecasts are based on the August 2015 forecasts for 

2015 and 2016 and the April 2015 forecasts for 2017 and 2018.
245 Money and credit
In an environment of very low interest rates, money and loan growth have continued to 
recover. Portfolio substitution and improved credit dynamics are driving broad money 
growth. In addition, the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and 
the expanded asset purchase programme (APP) have contributed to improvements 
in money and credit indicators. Banks™ funding costs stabilised at historical lows in the 
second quarter of 2015. Favourable lending conditions continued to support a further 
recovery in loan growth, which is materialising gradually. In addition, divergences in 
bank lending rates across countries have narrowed 
further. While bank lending is the main source of external 
funding for non-financial corporations (NFCs), the overall 
annual flow of external financing to NFCs is estimated to 
have stabilised in the second quarter of 2015. Overall, 
recent developments confirm that the ECB™s monetary 

policy measures are gradually being transmitted to 
lending conditions and are ultimately supportive of broad 
money and credit dynamics.The latest monetary data confirm the robustness of money growth dynamics. In July annual M3 growth stood at 5.3%, compared with 5.0% for the second 
quarter of 2015 (see Chart 24). This increase in M3 
growth was mostly driven by the narrow monetary aggregate M1. Annual growth in M1 continued to 

accelerate in July 2015, reaching an annual rate of 12.1%, compared with 10.9% in the second quarter of 2015. Recent developments in narrow money are consistent with the prospect of a continued recovery in economic activity. 
Money-holders are focusing on overnight deposits. 
M1 made a sizeable contribution to M3 growth in July, 
as through the second quarter of 2015 (see Chart 25). 
The environment of very low interest rates is providing 

incentives for money-holders to invest in overnight 
deposits within M3. The M1 contribution also reflects 
inflows related to the sales of public sector bonds, 
covered bonds and asset-backed securities by the 
money-holding sector in the context of the expanded 

asset purchase programme (APP). In the first half 
of 2015 the low levels of remuneration for less 
liquid monetary assets contributed to the ongoing 
contraction of short-term deposits other than overnight 
deposits, which continued to be a drag on M3 growth. 
Further support for M3 growth came from marketable 
instruments (i.e. M3 minus M2), the contribution of which 

was small, but positive. 
Chart 24M3, M1 and loans to the private sector(percentage changes; adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects)
-50510152020082009201020112012201320142015M3M1loans to the private sectorSource: ECB.Chart 25M3 and its components(contribution to M3 annual growth rate; adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects)
-8-6
-4
-20
246
810
1220082009201020112012201320142015M1other short-term depositsmarketable instrumentsM3Source: ECB.25Money creation continued to move towards domestic sources in July, partly linked to the 
effects of the TLT
ROs and the APP. 
Among the counterparts of M3 (see Chart 26), shifts away from 
longer-term financial liabilities and increased credit to general government have been the main contributors to annual money growth in recent months, while the contribution from credit to the private sector has turned 
marginally positive. The annual rate of contraction in 
MFIs™ longer-term financial liabilities (excluding capital 
and reserves) held by the money-holding sector continued to be strong and stood at -6.5% in July 2015, unchanged from the second quarter of 2015. The 

reductions in MFIs™ longer-term financial liabilities are 
in part triggered by the attractiveness of TLTROs as an 
alternative to long-term market-based bank funding, as well as by the APP purchases. Credit from MFIs 
(including the Eurosystem) to general government increased in July, mainly reflecting the increase in 
the holdings of general government securities by the 
Eurosystem under its public sector purchase programme 
(PSPP), while banks continued to reduce their holdings of government securities. 
The latter offers room for a rebalancing of MFI investments towards private sector 
assets. At the same time the contribution from the MFI sector™s net external 
asset position, which reflects a sizeable surplus in the euro area current account, moderated further in the second quarter of 2015 
and turned negative in July 2015. The large outflows 

from net external assets in July occurred despite the persistently positive contribution of the current account surplus.Banks™ funding costs edged up in the second 
quarter of 2015, but remain at low levels. Looking at the last few years, the composite cost of bank funding 
shows a declining trend (see Chart 27), against the 
backdrop of net redemptions of MFIs™ longer-term
 financial liabilities. Since its announcement, the 
expanded APP has significantly contributed to a further 
reduction in bank funding costs. The recent rise in 
banks™ cost of debt funding was driven by an increase in 
bank bond yields, while deposit rates remained stable at historically low levels. In this context, the July 2015 euro area bank lending survey showed that banks™ access to 
retail deposit and debt securities funding deteriorated in 
the second quarter of 2015, while access to the money market and securitisation improved, albeit to a lesser extent than in the previous quarter. There are no signs 
Chart 26Counterparts of M3(annual flows; EUR billions; adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects)
-800-600-400-2000200
400
600
8001,0001,2001,400
1,6002008200920102011201220132014credit to the private sector (1)credit to general government (2)

net external assets (3)
longer-term financial liabilities (excluding capital and reserves) (4)
other counterparts (including capital and reserves) (5)
M3Source: ECB.Notes: M3 is shown for reference only (M3 = 1+2+3-4+5).Chart 27Banks™ composite cost of debt financing
(percentages per annum)01
2
3
4
56720082009201020112012201320142015GermanySpainFranceItalyeuro areaSources: ECB, Merrill Lynch Global Index and ECB calculations.
Notes: Average of deposit rates on new business (i.e. the composite cost of deposits) 

and cost of unsecured market debt funding weighted with their corresponding 
outstanding amounts.26that banks™ deposit costs are moving into negative 
territory as a result of the ECB™s negative deposit 
facility rate. Bank lending conditions are supported by favourable developments in credit demand and supply factors. The July 2015 bank lending survey 
shows that increased competition between banks contributed to an easing of credit standards on loans to both enterprises and households in the second quarter of 2015. This development coincided with an increase 

in firms™ net demand for loans (see
 Chart 28). Banks also eased their terms and conditions on new loans across all categories in the second quarter, mainly 
driven by a further narrowing of margins on average loans. Overall, this suggests that the dampening effect 

of credit supply factors has receded further and that the impact of demand factors on NFC loan growth is turning slightly positive, which in turn will further support the growth of loans to the private sector. In this connection, 
the July survey indicates that in the second quarter banks used TLTRO funds to substitute for market-
based funding and to bolster credit supply.
Bank lending rates declined further in the second quarter, notably due to the ECB™s non-standard 

measures. Significant declines in the nominal cost of bank borrowing for NFCs and households have been 
recorded. In particular, since the third quarter of 2014, 
when the ECB stepped up its efforts in the context of 
further monetary policy accommodation, banks have progressively passed on the improvement in their funding costs in the form of lower bank lending rates: 
the composite costs of borrowing for households and non-financial corporations in the euro area have declined by around 70 basis points and 75 basis points respectively (see Charts 29 and 30). Recent data for July suggest that bank lending rates have reached 
historical lows.Divergences in bank lending rates across countries are significant, but have narrowed further. 
Despite some encouraging developments in credit supply conditions for the euro area as a whole, credit standards remain heterogeneous across countries and sectors. In this respect, the credit easing package adopted in June 2014 and the APP have contributed 
to a narrowing of the cross-country dispersion of Chart 28Factors contributing to a tightening of credit standards for loans to NFCs and net demand(average net percentages per category)-50-25025507510012520092008201020112012201320142015risk perceptionscompetition
cost of funds and balance sheet constraints
credit standardsnet demandSource: ECB.Notes: ﬁCost of funds and balance sheet constraintsﬂ are an unweighted average of 


ﬁrisk perceptionsﬂ are an unweighted average of ﬁgeneral economic situation and 


and ﬁrisk on collateral demandedﬂ; ﬁcompetitionﬂ is an unweighted average of ﬁbank 

Chart 29Composite indicator of the cost of borrowing for NFCs(percentages per annum; three-month moving averages)0.20 0.45 
0.70 
0.95 
1.20 1.45 1.70 12
3
4
567cross-country standard deviation (right-hand scale)GermanySpainFranceItalyNetherlandseuro area2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Source: ECB.Notes: The indicator for the total cost of bank borrowing is calculated by aggregating 

short and long-term rates using a 24-month moving average of new business volumes. 
countries. Latest observation: July 2015.27borrowing costs. Those euro area countries displaying 
relatively low growth rates for loans to NFCs have also experienced particularly strong decreases in bank lending rates for such loans. The growth of loans to the private sector is recovering gradually. 
Adjusted for sales and securitisation, annual growth of MFI loans to the private sector increased to 1.4% in July 2015, up from 0.9% in the second quarter of 2015. Following an extended period of accelerating contraction, the annual growth 
of loans to NFCs has been gradually recovering since the beginning of 2014, reaching 0.9% in July 2015 (see Chart 31). Despite these improvements, the dynamics of loans to NFCs remain subdued. The 
growth of loans to households improved further 
through the second quarter and stood at 1.9% in July (see Chart 32). As noted above, these developments 
have been supported by the significant decreases in bank lending rates which have been widespread in the euro area since summer 2014, as well as by an improvement in both the supply of and demand for bank loans. At the same time, the subdued economic 
Chart 30Composite indicator of the cost of borrowing for households for house purchase(percentages per annum; three-month moving averages)12
3
4
5
6
70.20
0.35
0.50
0.65
0.80
0.95
1.1020082009201020112012201320142015cross-country standard deviation (right-hand scale)GermanySpainFranceItalyNetherlandseuro areaSource: ECB.Notes: The indicator for the total cost of bank borrowing is calculated by aggregating 

short and long-term rates using a 24-month moving average of new business volumes. 
countries. Latest observation: July 2015.Chart 31MFI loans to non-financial corporations(annual rate of growth)-20-100102030
4020082009201020112012201320142015GermanySpainItalyeuro areaFrancecountry dispersionNetherlandsSource: ECB.Notes: Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. The country dispersion 



Latest observation: July 2015.Chart 32MFI loans to households(annual rate of growth)-1001020
302008200920102011201220132014country dispersionGermanySpainFranceItalyNetherlandseuro areaSource: ECB.Notes: Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. The country dispersion is calculated 



observation: July 2015.28conditions and relatively tight lending conditions still weigh on loan supply in some parts of the euro area. The overall annual flow of external financing to 
 NFCs is estimated to have stabilised in the second 
quarter of 2015, after strengthening further in the 
previous quarter.
 NFCs™ external financing in the 
second quarter stood at levels similar to those observed 
in early 2012 (see Chart 33) and in 2004-05, before the 
strong credit growth took place. NFCs™ external financing 
was supported by the strengthening of economic activity, 

further declines in the cost of bank lending, the easing of 
bank lending conditions and the very low cost of market-based debt. At the same time, related to low opportunity 
costs, NFCs, in particular listed firms, maintained 
historically high cash balances as precautionary liquidity 

buffers and possibly also to finance possible mergers 
and acquisitions in the future. 
Recent data show that net issuance of debt 
securities by NFCs moderated in May and June 2015. This development followed the surge in both the direct 

and indirect issuance of debt securities by NFCs and 
their conduits in the first quarter of 2015 after the launch 
of the public sector purchase programme (PSPP). Firms 
increased their recourse to market-based financing between January and April 2015 in 
order to benefit from the very favourable market conditions and low interest rates. 
The overall nominal cost of external financing for euro area NFCs increased 
slightly in the second quarter of 2015, after reaching historically low levels in 
February. 
This increase was driven by the decline in financial asset prices in the 
second quarter, resulting in an increase in the cost of both market-based debt and 

equity for euro area NFCs, which in July and August 2015 stood on average at around 
45 basis points higher than observed in February. The increase in the cost of market-
based financing was partly compensated for by the continued declines in bank lending 
rates in the second quarter of 2015.Chart 33NFCs™ external financing in the euro area
(EUR billions; four-quarter flows)-500 -250 0 250 
500 
750 1,000 
1,250 
1,500 2008200920102011201220132014MFI loans debt securities quoted shares loans from non-MFIs loans from rest of the world unquoted shares trade credit othertotal Sources: Eurostat and ECB. 
insurance corporations and pension funds) corrected for loans sales and securitisation. ﬁOtherﬂ is the difference between the total and the instruments included in the chart and 

accounts data. Latest observation: Q1 2015.296 Fiscal developments 
The improvement in the euro area fiscal balance is projected to continue, on account of the cyclical recovery and low interest rates. Based on the available information, however, the structural improvement is thought to have come to a halt. Looking 
ahead, additional consolidation efforts will be needed in many countries to set their high public debt ratio firmly on a downward path.The average euro area fiscal deficit is projected to continue to decline. Based on the September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, the 
general government deficit ratio for the euro area is expected to decline from 2.4%  of GDP in 2014 to 1.7% of GDP in 2017 (see Table 1). The budgetary improvement 

is expected to stem entirely from the projected cyclical improvement and lower 
interest costs in the baseline scenario. Compared with the June 2015 projections, the outlook for the headline deficit is broadly unchanged for 2015, reflecting the  fact that only a few new budgetary measures have been adopted in the meantime,  while for the outer years the deficit improvement is projected to be more moderate, on account of a slightly less favourable economic recovery. 
The structural balance is expected to remain broadly unchanged until 2017. This reflects improvements on the expenditure side, mainly in the form of lower interest expenditure, which are projected to be broadly offset by cuts in direct taxes 
and social contributions on the revenue side in several countries. The euro area 
fiscal deficit in structural terms is projected overall to decline marginally from 1.8%  of GDP in 2014 to 1.7% of GDP in 2017, which is slightly above the level forecast 
 in the June projections. Government debt is projected to decline gradually over the projection horizon, albeit remaining at a high level. The euro area debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to 
decline from its peak of 91.7% of GDP in 2014 to reach 89.4% of GDP by the end of 

the projection horizon. The improvement in the debt outlook, though not happening 
as quickly as expected in the June projections, is mainly explained by favourable developments in the interest-growth differential and a gradually improving primary 
Table 1
Fiscal developments in the euro area(percentages of GDP)201220132014201520162017a. Total revenue 
45.946.446.546.345.945.7b. Total expenditure 
49.549.349.048.447.947.5of which:c. Interest expenditure 3.02.82.62.42.32.2d. Primary expenditure (b - c)46.546.546.346.045.645.3Budget balance (a - b)-3.6-2.9-2.4-2.1-2.0-1.7Primary budget balance (a - d)-0.6-0.10.20.30.30.5Cyclically adjusted budget balance-3.5-2.2-1.9-1.8-1.9-1.7Structural balance-3.2-2.2-1.8-1.8-1.8-1.7Gross debt89.090.691.791.690.789.4Memo item: real GDP (percentage changes)
-0.7-0.20.91.41.71.8Sources: Eurostat and September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections.

30balance. The deficit-debt adjustments are expected to turn favourable, particularly 
as the debt-increasing impact of financial sector support fades. Further details on the fiscal impact of, and fiscal risks related to, financial sector support are spelt out in the article entitled ﬁThe fiscal impact of financial sector support during the crisisﬂ in this issue of the Economic Bulletin. As the projected debt level remains high in many 
euro area countries, further consolidation efforts are needed to set the debt ratio 
firmly on a downward path. This is all the more important in view of the substantial 
long-term challenges resulting from an ageing population and rising healthcare costs. 
The projected shortfall from structural efforts is expected to widen the gap with respect to the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). The aggregate 2015 fiscal stance is expected to be broadly neutral. This is appropriate 
within the current weak economic environment, in which fiscal policies should support the economic recovery, while ensuring debt sustainability. In the country-
specific recommendations this June, the European Council, however, identified risks 
of non-compliance with the structural effort requirements of the SGP in 12 of the 
 
17 euro area countries under review (see Box 8). Therefore, it will be important that, 
in particular, those countries that still need to consolidate increase their emphasis 
on debt sustainability and achieve progress towards their medium-term budgetary objectives. The draft budgetary plans for 2016 should clarify how governments 
whose structural efforts fall short of their commitments under the SGP intend to 
follow up on the country-specific recommendations to ensure compliance with the EU™s fiscal rules through faster deficit reduction. 
31Box 1  Recent developments and outlook  for non-oil commodity pricesGlobal prices for non-oil commodities have come under scrutiny in recent months, as continuing downward pressures have resulted in lows not seen over the past five years. Despite broadly similar trends in commodity prices for food and metals, supply and demand factors specific to individual markets warrant  a careful analysis of price developments for key commodities. This box discusses 
 the main drivers of recent developments in, and the outlook for, the prices of selected 
 non-oil commodities.Food commodity prices have been declining since mid-2012 as a result of oversupplied markets on the back of consecutive good harvests. Ample supply 

and high inventories have contributed to a fall in 
 wheat and maize prices, especially since the beginning of 2015 (see Chart A). The restrictions on wheat 
 exports from Russia in the first half of 2015 did not 
counter this decline. Concerns about weakening 
demand for ethanol inputs and slowing Chinese import activity have also contributed to the decline in maize prices. Soybean prices have likewise fallen as a result  of plentiful supply. 
The outlook for global food commodity prices remains subdued. Wheat and maize production  levels are expected to decline only marginally in the 
2015-16 season, while the production of oilseeds (particularly soybeans) is expected to increase. Price 
risks on the upside could result from adverse weather conditions, while, on the downside, a stronger than expected slowdown in the production of biofuels could further weaken demand  for some agricultural commodities.Metal commodity prices have been declining since mid-2011 owing to 
continued supply increases and weakening demand growth, particularly  in China. In comparison with food commodities, metals tend to be more sensitive to developments in global economic activity. As China imports a substantial proportion 
of global metal output, metal prices are particularly responsive to Chinese economic 
growth. Accordingly, market concerns about the strength of Chinese demand have 
accelerated the decline in metal prices since the beginning of 2015 (see Chart B). Ongoing increases in supply and high inventories also explain part of this fall.  The continued growth in production is supported by large investments in production 
capacity made in previous years, which were motivated by high prices at the time. Chart A  
Food commodity prices(index: 1 January 2007=100)050100150200250
300200720082009201020112012201320142015food maize 
wheat 
soybeans Sources: Hamburg Institute of International Economics (HWWI) and Bloomberg.32The decline during 2015 has been broad-based across different metal commodities, with prices for iron ore (the 
main input for steel) declining by 26%, aluminium by 13% and copper by 20% since the start of the year. 
Oversupply and the slowdown in the growth of 
emerging market economies are likely to dampen metal prices in the short term. Growth in demand for commodities in China is expected to remain weaker than in the past, consistent with the gradual rebalancing of the country™s growth path. More generally, growth in 
emerging market economies, whose output tends to be more commodity-intensive than that of advanced 
economies, is slowing. The outlook for metal prices is 
therefore one of only gradual rises, as the supply side is expected to rebalance only slowly. The main downside 
risks relate to a sharper than expected slowdown in the demand growth of emerging market economies, 
particularly China, and a higher resilience of supply to declining prices. Chart BMetal commodity prices(index: 1 January 2007=100)0 50 100 150 200 
250 200720082009201020112012201320142015non-ferrous metals aluminum copper iron ore, scrap Sources: Hamburg Institute of International Economics (HWWI) and Bloomberg.33Box 2 Liquidity conditions and monetary 
policy operations in the period 
from 22 April to 21 July 2015This box describes the ECB™s monetary policy operations during the third 
and fourth reserve maintenance periods of 2015, which ran from 22 A
pril to 9 June 2015 and from 10 June to 21 July 2015 respectively. 
During the period under review, the interest rates on the main refinancing operations (MROs), the 
marginal lending facility and the deposit facility remained unchanged at 0.05%, 0.30% and -0.20% respectively.
1 On 24 June 2015, the fourth targeted longer-term refinancing operation (TLTRO) was settled for an amount of •73.8
 billion, slightly more than markets expected but below the •97.8 billion allotted in March. This 
brought the total allotment in the first four TLTROs to •384
 billion.2 In addition, the Eurosystem continued buying public sector securities, covered bonds and  asset-backed securities as part of its expanded asset purchase programme (APP) 
with a targeted rate of •60 billion per month.3Liquidity needsIn the period under review, the average daily liquidity needs of the banking 

system, defined as the sum of autonomous factors and reserve requirements, increased by •24.6 billion compared with the previous review period to stand at •606.8
 billion.
 The increase was explained mainly by higher average autonomous 
factors, which rose by •23.7 billion to •496.8 billion (see the table).The increase in autonomous factors resulted mainly from an increase in 
liquidity-absorbing factors, including a significant change in the level of 
government deposits. The average level of government deposits increased 
by •19.5 billion to •85.6 billion. After the deposit facility rate was cut to -0.20% 
in September 2014, government deposits followed a downward trend, as 

the introduction of the negative deposit facility rate and the decision on the 
remuneration of government deposits4 gave national treasuries incentives to 
1 MROs continued to be conducted as fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment. The same 
procedure remained in use for the three-month longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs). 
The interest rate in each LTRO was fixed at the average of the rates on the MROs over the LTRO™s 
lifetime.2 For information on the TLTRO allotments, see similar boxes in previous issues of the Bulletin 
 
or the ECB™s website: http://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/implement/omo/html/index.en.html.3 Detailed information on the expanded APP is available on the ECB™s website: http://www.ecb.europa.

eu/mopo/implement/omt/html/index.en.html.4  Available at: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/oj_jol_2014_168_r_0015_en_txt.pdf.
34reduce their cash holdings with the Eurosystem. However, the downward trend 
in government deposits halted in the second maintenance period of 2015, and 
deposits increased again in the third and fourth maintenance periods. Low market 
rates and abundant liquidity reduced the alternatives for treasuries to place cash. 
In addition, the average level of banknotes in circulation rose by •23.8 billion, 
reflecting a long-term upward trend in demand for banknotes and recent 
 country-specific developments.Among the liquidity-providing factors, net foreign assets continued to rise in the period under review but were offset by changes in other autonomous factors. The depreciation of the euro at the beginning of
 2015 led to a revaluation 
of net foreign assets as of the second quarter of 2015. On average over the two reserve maintenance periods, net foreign assets were •42.2 billion higher than in the first and second maintenance periods, at •649.8 billion. However, the effect was 
offset by an increase of •45.4
 billion in other autonomous factors. Apart from this, 
revaluations in other financial assets of the Eurosystem were the main driver of a 
•22.9 billion increase in assets denominated in euro, which only partly offset the 
increase in liquidity-absorbing factors.The volatility of autonomous factors remained elevated during the period under review.
 That primarily reflected strong fluctuations in government deposits 
and somewhat high levels of volatility in demand for banknotes. As a result of 
the quarterly revaluations at the end of June, net foreign assets and net assets denominated in euro declined, which added to the volatility, but by less than in the 
previous review period.The average absolute error in weekly forecasts of autonomous factors increased slightly in the period under review, rising
 to •6.4 billion, mostly as a result of higher forecasting errors for government deposits. This shows that it remained difficult to anticipate the investment activities of treasuries in the presence 

of increasingly negative short-term money market rates and high levels of excess liquidity.
Liquidity provisionThe average amount of liquidity provided through open market operations Œ 
tender operations and outright purchases Œ increased by •165.3 billion in the period under review, rising to •937.2
 billion. This increase was driven almost 
entirely by outright purchases, while tender operations remained almost unchanged.The average level of liquidity provided through tender operations increased only slightly, rising to •513.2
 billion, albeit with significant substitution among the operations. The two three-year LTROs which matured in the previous 
35review period and the reduced participation in regular operations (i.e. MROs and three-month LTROs) in this review period were, on average, compensated for by 
TLTRO allotments. While the average outstanding amount of TLTROs increased 
by •87.9 billion, the average for MROs decreased by •41.0 billion, the average for three-month LTROs decreased by •6.3
 billion, and the average for the three-year LTROs (which stood at •38.6
 billion in the previous review period) declined to zero.Average liquidity provided through outright portfolios increased by •163.4 billion to •424.0 billion owing to the implementation of the expanded APP.
 The increases in the average liquidity provided by the public sector purchase 
programme, the third covered bond purchase programme and the asset-backed 
securities purchase programme (which rose by •135.4 billion, •31.7 billion and •3.7 billion respectively) more than offset the declines caused by the maturing of 
some bonds held under the Securities Markets Programme and the previous two covered bond purchase programmes.Excess liquidityExcess liquidity increased further during the review period, rising to an average of •329.2 billion, on account of the APP and the TLT
ROs. That increase was fairly evenly distributed across the two maintenance periods, with the respective 
increases being •73.0 billion and •79.2 billion. While the monthly APP purchases 
support a steady upward trend in excess liquidity, swings in autonomous factors may 
contribute to significant fluctuations around this trend within a maintenance period.Average daily current account holdings increased by •95.8 billion to •339.4 billion on account of the higher level of excess liquidity.
 Average use of 
the deposit facility also increased further, rising from •55.5
 billion to •101.3 billion. Average recourse to the deposit facility increased only slightly as a percentage of 

excess liquidity, standing at
 46%, compared with 42% in the previous review period.Interest rate developmentsReflecting the increase in excess liquidity and growing acceptance of trading 
at negative rates, money market rates decreased further in the period under review. 
The EONIA decreased to averages of -0.098% and -0.119% in the third and 
fourth maintenance periods respectively, compared with an average of -0.045% in 
the previous review period. In the secured segment, overnight rates decreased to levels close to the deposit facility rate. In particular, average overnight repo rates 
36in the GC Pooling5 market declined to -0.18% and -0.17% for the standard and extended collateral baskets respectively, down
 5 and 7 basis points compared with the previous review period.5 The GC Pooling market allows repurchase agreements to be traded on the Eurex platform 
against standardised baskets of collateral.Eurosystem liquidity situation22 April to 21 July28 January to 21 AprilFourth maintenance periodThird maintenance periodLiabilities Œ liquidity needs (averages; EUR billions)Autonomous liquidity factors1,690.3(+88.7)1,601.61,696.2(+11.0)
1,685.2(+58.0)Banknotes in circulation1,034.5(+23.8)1,010.71,042.7(+15.3)1,027.4(+11.5)
Government deposits85.6(+19.5)66.196.3(+19.8)76.5(+6.3)Other autonomous factors570.2(+45.4)524.8557.1(-24.2)581.3(+40.3)Monetary policy instrumentsCurrent accounts339.4(+95.8)243.6381.4(+78.0)303.4(+41.6)Minimum reserve requirements111.2
(+0.9)109.1112.3
(+1.9)110.3
(-0.2)Deposit facility101.3(+45.8)55.5103.1(+3.4)99.7(+31.1)
0.0(+0.0)0.00.0(+0.0)0.0(+0.0)Assets Œ liquidity supply (averages; EUR billions)Autonomous liquidity factors1,193.8(+65.1)1,128.71,183.2(-19.8)1,203.0(+40.8)Net foreign assets649.8(+42.2)607.6642.9(-12.8)655.7(+29.8)Net assets denominated in euro544.1(+22.9)521.1540.3(-7.0)547.3(+11.0)
Monetary policy instrumentsOpen market operations937.2(+165.3)771.9997.5(+111.9)
885.6(+90.0)Tender operations
513.2(+2.0)511.2
525.7(+23.2)502.5(-2.4)MROs89.7(-41.0)130.782.4(-13.4)95.9(-23.0)
0.0(+0.0)0.00.0(+0.0)0.0(+0.0)Three-month LTROs
90.5(-6.3)96.983.8(-12.6)96.3(-12.1)Three-year LTROs
0.0(-38.6)38.60.0(+0.0)0.0(+0.0)Targeted LTROs
333.0(+87.9)245.1359.5(+49.2)310.3(+32.6)Outright portfolios424.0(+163.4)260.7471.8(+88.6)383.1(+92.6)First covered bond purchase programme24.4(-2.1)26.523.3(-2.0)25.3(-0.7)Second covered bond purchase programme11.1
(-0.8)11.9
10.8(-0.5)11.3
(-0.2)Third covered bond purchase programme87.1(+31.7)55.495.1(+14.9)80.2(+16.7)Securities Markets Programme136.6(-4.5)141.1134.6(-3.7)138.3(-2.5)Asset-backed securities purchase programme7.5(+3.7)3.88.8(+2.4)6.4(+1.7)Public sector purchase programme157.4(+135.4)22.0199.1(+77.5)121.6(+77.6)Marginal lending facility0.2(-0.1)0.30.3(+0.2)0.1(-0.1)Other liquidity-based information (averages; EUR billions)Aggregate liquidity needs606.8(+24.6)582.2622.9(+29.9)593.0(+17.2)Autonomous factors496.8(+23.7)473.1513.3(+30.7)482.6(+17.4)Excess liquidity329.2(+139.5)189.7371.9(+79.2)292.7(+73.0)Interest rate developments (percentages)MROs0.05(+0.00)0.050.05(+0.00)0.05(+0.00)Marginal lending facility0.30(+0.00)0.300.30(+0.00)0.30(+0.00)Deposit facility-0.20(+0.00)-0.20-0.20(+0.00)-0.20(+0.00)EONIA average-0.107(-0.063)-0.045-0.119(-0.021)-0.098(-0.037)Source: ECB.

37Box 3 The usefulness of TARGET2 transaction 

data for the analysis of the unsecured 
overnight money marketDespite the importance of money markets, granular information on transactions is generally not readily available. Overnight transactions mainly take place over the counter, and when recording these, the few trading platforms typically 

focus on certain jurisdictions. For the euro area, daily information on unsecured overnight lending is collected for a panel of banks, and the weighted average  of their rate contributions gives rise to the euro overnight index average (EONIA)  as the reference rate for the overnight unsecured segment. However, the panel bank 
contributions are not at the level of individual transactions, but daily aggregates  of their lending activity. As of mid-2016, money market transaction data will be 
collected for the euro area under the Money Market Statistical Reporting Regulation, under which, initially, 53
 banks will report.1TARGET2 (the Trans-European 
Automated Real-time Gross settlement Express 
Transfer system) offers an unparalleled source of granular overnight money 
market information. While information on overnight unsecured loans in TARGET2 
is not directly available, it can be accessed by screening the set of transactions that 
occur through the payment system for the settlement of the two legs of an interbank 
loan.2 This method has long been used worldwide and allows for the reconstructing of 
significant parts of the unsecured overnight money market activity.
The large coverage of banks in TARGET2 provides a comprehensive picture 
of the unsecured overnight money market. A key benefit of using TARGET2 data 
for analysis is the high number of banks (around 1,000) participating in the payment 
system.3 Although a small fraction of overnight market trading settles privately outside 
TARGET2, TARGET2 data still provide a close representation of the euro area 
overnight market. This is evidenced by the fact that the total lending as measured 
by TARGET2 data for the second quarter of 2014 is broadly similar to that resulting 
from the Euro Money Market Survey (•2.0 trillion),4 which captures trading outside 
TARGET2, but covers a much lower number of banks (154).
1 See Regulation (EU) No 1333/2014 of the European Central Bank of 26 November 2014 concerning 
statistics on the money markets (ECB/2014/48): https://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/oj_jol_2014_359_r_0006_en_txt.pdf2 For more information, please see the box entitled ﬁUsing TARGET2 payment data to analyse money 

market conditionsﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, May 2013 or the report on the Macro-prudential Research Network (MaRs): https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2014/html/pr140623.en.html3 Furthermore, each transaction in TARGET2 contains the same fields and information, allowing 

comparability. See the TARGET Annual Report 2014: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2015/html/pr150601.en.html4 See the Euro Money Market Survey and Study: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/money/mmss/html/

index.en.html38Aggregate statistics for the overnight unsecured money market based on TARGET2 data confirm some well-known crisis-related developments. For instance, the overnight unsecured money market shrank from a peak  of •2.5 trillion per reserve maintenance period in mid-2008
 to slightly over •0.5
 trillion by the time of the settlement of the second three-year longer-term refinancing 
operation in March 2012. The total number of banks active in the overnight 
unsecured market in a given reserve maintenance period dropped from a peak of around 600 in August
 2008 to around 330 by June 2015 (see Chart A). In parallel, 

money market stress became apparent from rate developments. For example, the average spread of the interest rate paid for overnight market funds over the deposit facility rate varied significantly over time. After falling towards the deposit facility rate 
with the introduction of the fixed rate full allotment procedure and the associated increase in excess liquidity, the spread occasionally reached high levels, especially 

during the euro area sovereign debt crisis that started in spring 2010 (see Chart B). Money market data derived from TARGET2 transactions also provide information on the dispersion of rates and volumes across banks. Chart C presents volume-weighted kernel densities of the spread of overnight rates over the deposit facility rate in selected periods. In mid-2008, the bulk of trading took 
place at interest rates close to the main refinancing operation rate (i.e. at a spread of 100 basis points) under the variable rate tender procedure, and in 2011
 and 2014 at rates closer to the deposit facility rate, with excess liquidity resulting from the full allotment procedure. However, the densities also reveal considerable dispersion of 
Chart AOvernight unsecured money market volume and number of banks(EUR billions; number of banks)200300
400
500
600
700
80005001,0001,5002,0003,0002,50020082009201020112012201320142015volume in MP (left-hand scale)number of banks in MP (right-hand scale)Sources: TARGET2 and ECB calculations.
Note: Figures are computed at maintenance period (MP) level. Chart BWeighted average overnight spread
(basis points)-20050100150FRFAOct.2008Sov. debtcrisisMay 20103-year LTRODec. 2011Extended APP
announcementJan. 201520082009201020112012201320142015maintenance period weighted rate
Sources: TARGET2 and ECB calculations.
Notes: Figures are computed at maintenance period level. The overnight spread 



programme.39interest rates at different points in time, with a particularly large tail towards higher 
spreads at the end of 2011
 when the sovereign debt crisis reached its height.5 Individual bank transaction data can be matched with characteristics of the 
trading banks, such as their size, geographical location or credit risk, to obtain 
a better understanding of developments in the overnight unsecured market.  To explain the dispersion in rates, TARGET2 data are matched with the credit ratings 

of the trading banks. For this purpose, the ratings by four agencies6 are grouped into six credit risk groups from the lowest risk group (1) to the highest risk group (6), as presented in the table. Both borrowing and lending banks are assigned to credit risk groups.7The credit rating data matching indicates that trading volume is largely 
determined by the credit risk of the borrowing banks. Chart D presents a breakdown of the total borrowing volume by credit risk group.
8 Banks with the highest credit standing (Group 1) strongly reduced their borrowing by end-2012, for at least two important reasons. First, this group of non-stressed banks is known to have 5 As the densities are volume-weighted and trades at higher spreads are relatively small in volume, the 
density does not capture the full extent to which rates are dispersed.6 DBRS, Fitch Ratings, Moody™s and Standard & Poor™s are the four external credit assessment 

institutions (ECAIs) accepted by the Eurosystem.7 The assignment to a specific credit risk group is based on the availability of at least one longer-term 

rating. When two or more ratings are available, the group is determined by the average of the ratings 
after they have been converted into a numeric scale. The number of banks represented in each group 
is not homogeneous, as it reflects the representativeness of each group in the euro area. Over time, 
banks may change group owing to rating migration. See also the table. 8 The total share of overall volume for banks not included in the sample is around 25%. This share stays 

relatively constant over time, therefore not biasing the sample.Chart CDistribution of overnight spread in selected periods(basis points)0.000.02
0.040.060.0802550751001251502014 MP12011 MP11
2008 MP6x-axis: overnight spread vs. deposit facility rate
y-axis: densitySources: TARGET2 and ECB calculations.
Notes: Figures are computed at maintenance period (MP) level. The overnight spread 

is over the deposit facility rate.Chart DOvernight borrowing volume by credit risk group(EUR billions)05001,0001,5002,0002008200920102011201220132014Group 1Group 2
Group 3Group 4
Group 5
Group 6Sources: TARGET2, DBRS, Fitch Ratings, Moody™s, Standard & Poor™s and ECB 
calculations.
Note: Figures are computed at maintenance period level. 40accumulated a lot of excess liquidity and therefore had smaller borrowing needs despite market access. Second, a significant portion of banks were downgraded during the financial crisis, potentially moving the banks and their lending volume to a new credit risk group. However, credit risk group migration could not, by itself, 
explain the reduction in total volume for all banks. Furthermore, banks with a lower rating (Groups 2 to 3) kept on borrowing contained amounts throughout the period. Considering the higher liquidity needs of such banks, these limited amounts  reflect the fact that banks can also seek funds elsewhere, i.e. at a longer maturity, 
in the secured segment of the market, from non-bank counterparties or from the Eurosystem. The fact that the secured market has gained importance in recent years 
can also be partly attributed to a substitution of unsecured trading.9 The dispersion of interest rates is also determined by counterparty credit 
risk, with spreads across bank credit rating groups varying over time. Chart E presents weighted average borrowing rates per credit risk group. Lower-rated banks generally pay higher interest rates, which explain part of the rate dispersion observed 
in Chart C. However, Chart E also shows that there was little dispersion across the 
average borrowing rates of credit risk groups during 2008-10 and 2014-15. This 
indicates how banks with limited market access do not influence overall unsecured money market rates, as they often need to obtain liquidity from other sources, as mentioned above. It was only as of the end of 2011
 and into 2012 that considerable 
rate differentials across credit risk groups emerged, but against small volumes for the 
more risky borrowers. Overall, only banks of a certain perceived quality could obtain funds in the unsecured interbank market.9 See the Euro Money Market Survey and Study: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/money/mmss/html/
index.en.html Chart EOvernight borrowing spread by credit risk group(basis points)050100150FRFAOct. 2008Sov. debt crisis
May 20103-year LTRO
Dec. 2011Extended APP
announcementJan. 201520082009201020112012201320142015Group 4Group 5
Group 6Group 1
Group 2
Group 3Sources: TARGET2, DBRS, Fitch Ratings, Moody™s, Standard & Poor™s and ECB calculations.

allotment. APP = asset purchase programme.
41Investment grade banks dominate overnight market lending. Chart F provides a who-to-whom breakdown of the overnight lending and borrowing volumes per credit risk group, which in comparison with Chart D adds information on the source of the funds in three maintenance periods. It shows that the bulk of trading took place among banks with the highest rating (Group 1) in 2008, but that this volume declined after 2008 as demand from those banks evaporated amid high levels of excess liquidity. However, the bulk of the supply remained in the hands of the 
investment grade banks, who lent contained amounts to a variety of lower-rated 
banks in 2011
 and 2014.Chart F Overnight lending and borrowing volume by credit risk group1234
562011 (MP11) 2014 (MP1) Borrowers bycredit riskgroup Non-investment gradeInvestment grade•10 bn •1 bn Size dailyaverage volumesGroup 1Group 2Group 3Group 4Group 5Group 62008 (MP6) •25 bnSources: TARGET2, DBRS, Fitch Ratings, Moody™s, Standard & Poor™s and ECB calculations.
Notes: The size of the bubble represents average daily lending volumes. The shares within the bubbles represent the borrowing per 



one public credit rating assessment. Definition of credit risk groupsRange of classes by credit rating agency (long-term)GradeEurosystem harmonised rating scale for ECAIsDBRSFitch RatingsMoody™s
Standard & Poor™s
Group 1AAA to AA (low)
AAA to AA-
Aaa to Aa3
AAA to AA-
INVESTMENTCQS1Group 2A (high) to A (low)
A+ to A-
A1 to A3
A+ to A-
CQS2Group 3BBB (high) to BBB (low)BBB+ to BBB-Baa1 to Baa3BBB+ to BBB-CQS3Group 4BB (high) to BB (low)BB+ to BB-Ba1 to Ba3BB+ to BB-NON-INVESTMENTGroup 5B (high) to B (low)B+ to B-B1 to B3B+ to B-Group 6CCC (high) to DCCC+ to DCaa1 to DCCC+ to DSources: TARGET2, DBRS, Fitch Ratings, Moody™s, Standard & Poor™s and ECB calculations.

Notes: CQS (credit quality step) refers to the Eurosystem harmonised rating scale for ECAIs (external credit assessment institutions). 
See the box entitled ﬁEurosystem credit assessment framework for monetary policy operationsﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, April 2014.
42Box 4  Publication of TARGET balances
The ECB will, as of this month, publish data on the individual TARGET balances of the euro area national central banks (NCBs) on a monthly basis.1 These data will be included in the ECB™s statistical data warehouse (SDW) under 
the framework of the monetary financial institution balance sheet statistics.2 The publication of individual TARGET balances is part of the ECB™s commitment to 

transparency. This Box briefly recalls what TARGET balances are and the factors 
behind their evolution.3TARGET balances are the net claims and liabilities of the euro area NCBs 
vis-à-vis the ECB which arise through cross-border payments settled in 
central bank money of the respective national banking sectors or the NCBs 
themselves and are executed via the common euro area payment platform 
known as TARGET.
4 When a bank makes a payment to another bank via TARGET, 
the current account of the payer™s bank at its NCB is debited and the current account 

of the recipient bank at its NCB is credited. If both banks hold their current accounts 
at the same NCB there is no net impact on the aggregate account of banks at the 

NCB and there are no implications for TARGET balances. However, in the case 
of cross-border transactions, the NCB of the paying bank sees a reduction in that 
bank™s account at the NCB, and the NCB of the recipient bank sees an increase 
in the recipient bank™s account. Such positions are balanced by a TARGET liability 
for the first NCB and a TARGET claim for the second NCB. TARGET liabilities and 

claims also result from cross-border transactions by NCBs themselves, such as 
the purchase or sale of securities held for investment purposes. At the end of each 
day, such intra-Eurosystem claims and liabilities are aggregated and netted out 
throughout the Eurosystem. This leaves each NCB with a single net bilateral position 
vis-à-vis the ECB, in the form of a positive or negative TARGET balance. By design, 
all the TARGET balances (including the ECB™s balance) add up to zero.
5These TARGET balances constitute a normal feature of the decentralised implementation of monetary policy in the euro area. They reflect cross-border 
 1 TARGET stands for Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross Settlement Express Transfer 
System. The current system is called TARGET2. It fully replaced TARGET in May 2008, but for 

convenience both TARGET and TARGET2 are referred to in this box as ﬁTARGETﬂ.2 Data are published on the first working day of every month, with a one month time lag. For more 

details, see the ECB™s website under ﬁStatistics > Monetary and financial statistics > TARGET 

balances of participating NCBsﬂ.3 For more details, see the article entitled ﬁTARGET balances and monetary policy operationsﬂ in the 

Monthly Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB, May 2013.4 A few non-euro area NCBs in the European Union have joined TARGET on a voluntary basis. This 

article focuses on the euro area countries.5 The ECB™s TARGET balance vis-a-vis the NCBs as depicted in the chart reflects the net result of 

claims and liabilities stemming from activities carried out directly by the ECB, for instance in the 

context of the US dollar-euro liquidity swap arrangements.43financial flows within the euro area, which arise from cross-border financial transactions largely initiated by private entities such as credit institutions, corporates or individuals and the resultant cross-border distribution of central bank liquidity. Individual TARGET claims and 
liabilities of the NCBs vis-à-vis the ECB and of the ECB vis-à-vis the NCBs have therefore existed since the start of Economic and Monetary Union. In fact, the sum 
of all claims on the balance sheets of euro area NCBs stood at around EUR100 billion prior to mid-2007.The emergence of large TARGET balances during the crisis broadly reflects the distribution of non-cash central bank liquidity within the Eurosystem. The Eurosystem implements its monetary policy in a decentralised manner, whereby the aggregate 

Eurosystem liquidity provision via its NCBs corresponds to the aggregate liquidity needs of the euro area banking sector. Liquidity can be redistributed across 
banking sectors through the euro area interbank market. During the crisis, the liquidity needs of euro area banks increased significantly, with substantial 
dispersion across countries. At the same time, interbank 

markets dried up, which prevented the distribution of liquidity via private markets. From the start of the crisis, the Eurosystem accommodated the euro area banking sector™s liquidity needs, providing ample extra liquidity 
through its refinancing operations. As of October 2008, 
the Eurosystem has fully satisfied banks™ demand for 
central bank liquidity in fixed-rate full-allotment tenders 
subject to the availability of eligible collateral. The significant increase in the recourse to central 
bank funding during the crisis, and its uneven 
distribution across countries, were associated 
with a corresponding rise in TARGET claims and 
liabilities. These increased until the end of 2012 

(see chart) as a result of banks in some countries 

facing net payment outflows in conjunction with 
reduced access to short-term funding markets while 
banks in other countries benefited from large financial 
inflows. Subsequently, as market financing conditions 
gradually improved and banks™ use of Eurosystem 
refinancing operations declined, TARGET balances 
generally decreased in absolute terms. They widened 

again somewhat in late 2014. This in part reflected 
the relatively higher participation of banks in some  
countries with TARGET liabilities in the Targeted 
 Longer-Term Refinancing Operations (TLTROs) 
ChartTARGET balances
(EUR billions)a)-200-1000100
200
300
400500600
700
800MayMayMayMayMayMayMayMay20082009201020112012201320152014FIBEIEECB
DELU
NLb)-500-400
-300
-200
-1000100200300PTESFRECB
GRATIT2008200920102011MayMayMayMayMayMayMayMay2012201320142015c)-30-20
-100102030
40050100
150200250-100
-50SKMT
Extra euro area NCBsECB (right-hand scale)
EE
LVLT
SI
CY2008200920102011MayMayMayMayMayMayMayMay2012201320142015Source: ECB.Notes: ﬁExtra euro area NCBsﬂ represents the claims of those non-euro area EU NCBs 
that participate in TARGET on a voluntary basis. The NCBs included in this group change 
over time. As of January 2015, it refers to Bulgaria, Denmark, Poland and Romania.
44launched in June 2014, as these operations tended to be more attractive for such 
counterparties. The expanded asset purchase programme (APP) that started in 
March 2015 may affect TARGET balances when the buying and selling parties are 
operating in different jurisdictions, which might explain more recent developments. 
Interpreting TARGET balances within an integrated financial system like the euro area requires caution. For instance, these balances also reflect money transfers within large, cross-border banking groups where the central bank money needed by the group is procured centrally at one NCB and then redistributed among group members via TARGET. These balances also reflect payment flows caused by 
remote participants.6 Other factors that highlight the need for caution include differing 
preferences between euro area countries regarding holding banknotes and access to the Eurosystem monetary policy instruments of banks outside the European Economic Area via subsidiaries in a country connected to TARGET.
7 In addition, cross-country purchases of securities in the context of the APP may affect TARGET 
balances but do not indicate financial stress. Thus, TARGET balances do not, and 
are not meant to, provide a complete picture of the net financial flows between countries.6 An institution established in a country in the European Economic Area but which is not participating in 
TARGET (e.g. a bank located in the United Kingdom) may open an account at another NCB of its choice 

participating in TARGET.7 More information on this is provided in the box entitled ﬁTARGET2 balances of national central banks in 

the euro areaﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, Issue 10, ECB, October 2011. 45Box 5 Revised trade weights for the effective 

exchange rates of the euro reflect the  increasing importance of emerging  market economiesThe ECB has updated recently the trade weights underlying the calculation of the effective exchange rates (EERs) of the euro. This is carried out every three years to capture medium-term changes in the pattern of euro area manufacturing trade in a timely fashion.1 In the most recent exercise, carried out in August 2015, 
average trade weights for the three-year period from 2010 to 2012 were added to the series, while weights for previous time periods (from 1995 to 2009) were updated to reflect revised trade data.The updated and revised series shows a continued 
rise in the importance of emerging market 
economies, in particular China, as trading partners of the euro area (see Chart A and the table). The weight of China in a basket of 38 of the euro area™s 

most important trading partners (the EER-38 group), which stood at around 4% in the period 1995-97, rose 
further from about 15% in the period 2007-09 to around 18% in the period 2010-12. The importance of other 
emerging economies as trading partners of the euro area also increased Œ albeit at a more moderate pace Œ with Turkey, Russia and Indonesia recording the largest 
gains. Conversely, the trade weights of advanced 
economies in the EER-38 group declined over the same 

period. In 1995 the two largest trading partners  of the euro area were the United Kingdom and the 
United States, with trade weights of around 18% and 17% respectively. In 2012 their shares had declined 
 to about 10% and 13% respectively. 
The importance of central and eastern Europe (CEE) in euro area trade has also increased, in line with growing economic integration in Europe. Since the period 1995-97 the combined weight of CEE 1 For an overview of the methodology used to calculate the euro EERs, see Schmitz, M., De Clercq, M., 
Fidora, M., Lauro, B. and Pinheiro, C., ﬁRevisiting the effective exchange rates of the euroﬂ, 
Occasional 
Paper Series, No 134, ECB, 2012.Chart AEvolution of trade weights of the EER-38 group of trading partners(percentages)05101520
251995-971998-002001-032004-062007-092010-12China United States 
United Kingdom other advanced European economiesother advanced economies
other emerging market economies
CEE countriesSource: ECB.Notes: The item ﬁother advanced European economiesﬂ comprises Denmark, Norway, 

Sweden and Switzerland; ﬁother advanced economiesﬂ comprises Australia, Canada, 

Hong Kong, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Singapore and Taiwan; ﬁCEE 

countriesﬂ comprises Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and 
Romania; and ﬁother emerging market economiesﬂ comprises Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, 
Chile, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Philippines, South Africa, Russia, 

Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela.
46economies has risen above that of, for example, the United States and the  United Kingdom, although it remained stable in the 2010-12 reference period,  at 14% of the EER-38 group, reflecting the downturn in intra-European trade over that period. In particular, CEE countries had a weight of 18% in euro area 
manufacturing imports, which was second only to that of China and reflects their crucial role in the pan-European contribution to global value chains.China™s position as the euro area™s largest trading partner mainly results from 
its importance in imports and third-market competition (see Chart B). China has become the main source of euro area manufacturing imports, with a share of 21% 
over the period 2010-12. On the export side, to also account for competition faced by 
euro area companies in foreign markets from exporters based in third countries,  Trade weights for the EER-38 group of trading partners
(percentages)Country1995-971998-002001-032004-062007-092010-12Change 2010-12 versus 1995-97China4.45.37.611.2
14.817.713.2United States16.819.418.715.513.512.7-4.1United Kingdom18.417.716.614.312.010.3-8.1Switzerland6.76.05.85.45.35.5-1.2Japan9.68.87.66.75.75.3-4.3Poland2.42.83.34.05.05.12.7Czech Republic2.22.43.03.44.14.11.9Sweden4.84.43.94.13.93.6-1.2Russia2.51.82.23.03.53.51.0Turkey
2.22.22.33.03.13.31.1Korea2.92.72.83.23.23.20.3Indonesia1.51.31.51.82.12.41.0Hungary1.52.22.52.62.52.30.7Denmark2.62.32.32.22.11.7-0.9Romania0.70.81.11.41.61.71.0Taiwan
2.32.42.11.81.51.5-0.8Brazil1.51.41.21.21.41.4-0.1Hong Kong2.01.71.51.51.31.4-0.6Mexico0.91.21.31.21.21.30.5Singapore1.81.61.41.41.21.3-0.6Canada1.51.61.61.41.31.2-0.3Thailand1.21.01.01.01.11.1-0.1Malaysia1.21.21.21.11.01.0-0.2South Africa0.90.90.91.00.91.00.0Norway1.31.21.01.11.11.0-0.3Australia0.80.70.70.70.70.80.0India1.00.80.70.60.60.7-0.3Israel1.11.00.90.70.70.7-0.4Morocco0.60.60.60.60.60.60.0Bulgaria0.30.30.40.40.50.50.2Chile0.30.30.30.40.40.40.1Algeria0.30.30.30.30.40.40.1Argentina0.60.50.30.30.30.4-0.2Croatia0.50.40.50.50.50.4-0.2Philippines0.40.50.50.40.30.3-0.1Venezuela
0.20.20.20.20.20.2-0.1New Zealand0.10.10.10.10.10.10.0Iceland0.00.10.10.10.10.10.0Total
100.0100.0100.0100.0100.0100.00.0Source: ECB Note: Countries are listed in the order of their trade weights for the period 2010-12.47the overall trade weights are adjusted through ﬁdouble-weightingﬂ. In particular, 
owing to the importance of China, as well as some other advanced and emerging market economies, as competitors of euro area exporters, this adjustment results in a significant increase in their trade weights beyond the levels implied by direct export linkages. In the case of China, the ﬁdoubleﬂ export weight amounted to 16%, compared with a simple export weight of 7%, over the period 2010-12. Using the updated weighting scheme, it emerges that the depreciation of the euro Œ in both nominal and real effective terms Œ since 2010 was slightly more pronounced than previously indicated. Between the beginning of 2010 and the end of July 2015 the updated daily nominal EER of the euro vis-à-vis the EER-38 group of trading partners depreciated by 12.0%, compared with 11.6% 
based on the previous indicator. The revision was primarily due to the increased 
trade weight of the Chinese renminbi (see Chart C). The improvement in euro area 
price competitiveness since early 2010, as reflected in the real depreciation of the euro, was also slightly more sizeable according to the updated indicators. From the 
beginning of 2010 to June 2015 the updated CPI-deflated real EER-38 declined by 16.1%, whereas the previous index decreased by 15.3% (see Chart D). Chart BComparison of trade weights of the EER-38 group of trading partners, 2010-12(percentages)051015
2025ChinaUnited StatesUnited Kingdomother advanced European economies
other advanced economiesother emerging market economiesCEE countriestotal weightimport weightsimple export weightdouble export weightSource: ECB.Notes: The simple export weights are the shares of each country or group of countries in euro area manufacturing exports. Double export weights capture the competition faced by 

euro area exporters in foreign markets from domestic producers and exporters from third countries.48Chart CContributions to the change in the nominal EER-38 since 2010(percentages; percentage points)420-2
-4-6-8-10
-12-14123456789contribution (previous weights)contribution (revised weights)
change (previous weights)change (revised weights)1 Chinese renminbi2 US dollar
3 pound sterling4 Swiss franc
5 Japanese yen
6 Russian rouble7 Swedish krona
8 Turkish lira
9 nominal EER-38Source: ECB.
Notes: A negative value indicates a depreciation of the euro, while a positive value 

indicates an appreciation of the single currency. The chart covers the period from 

1 January 2010 to 31 July 2015.Chart DPrevious and revised real EER-38(CPI-deflated; index: Q1 1999 = 100)8486
889092
949698100
1021041062010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 previous real EER-38 revised real EER-38 Source: ECB.Note: A downward movement indicates a depreciation of the euro, while 

an upward movement indicates an appreciation of the single currency.
49Box 6 A survey-based measure of slack for 
 the euro areaMeasures of economic slack, such as the output gap, are an important element of economic policy analysis, as they represent the interaction between demand and supply.
 However, slack is unobserved and has to be estimated. 
Indeed, estimates of slack are very uncertain, tend to be revised and, therefore, need 
to be interpreted with caution.1 This box presents a tool that draws on information 
about demand from available survey indicators, in order to estimate slack in the 
economy. The measure described tends to be revised less frequently, and can thus 
complement output gap estimates of structural models.Several methods exist to assess the degree of 
slack in the economy.
 Estimates of slack based on a production function have the advantage that they are consistent with economic theory and are able to explain developments in potential output via its components (labour, capital and total factor productivity). Estimates 

of this type are produced by the European Commission2 and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)3, while the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) uses different approaches depending on the 

country assessed. Chart A depicts the recent estimates 
by these institutions for the euro area. The output gap 

in the euro area is estimated to stand between -2.1% and -2.7% in 2015, suggesting that a considerable amount of slack remains. One drawback of such estimates, however, is that they tend to be revised quite 

significantly, due to changes to data, parameters and 
the model setup.4To assess the amount of slack, analysts also turn to surveys such as capacity 
utilisation in the manufacturing sector, or the perceived degree of insufficient 
demand as a constraint on businesses. These surveys have the advantage of 
being revised less frequently, thus performing better in real time, and are known 
 1 See, for example, the box entitled ﬁRecent evidence on the uncertainty surrounding real-time estimates 
of the euro area output gapﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, November 20112 See Havik, K. et al., ﬁThe production function methodology for calculating potential growth rates and 

output gapsﬂ, European Economy Œ Economic Papers, No 535, European Commission, November 2014.3 See Beffy, P. O. et al., ﬁNew OECD methods for supply-side and medium-term assessments: a capital 

services approachﬂ, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No 482, OECD, July 2006.4 On the revisions and uncertainty of estimates by international institutions, see Section 2.2 of Anderton, 

R. et al., ﬁPotential output from a euro area perspectiveﬂ, Occasional Paper Series, No 156, ECB, November 2014.Chart AEstimates of the euro area output gap(percentage shares of potential output)-4-3-2-101234199920022005200820112014European CommissionIMFOECDSources: European Commission Spring 2015 Economic Forecast, IMF World Economic 
Outlook April 2015 and OECD Economic Outlook May 2015.
50for better identifying turning points in the cycle. Survey indicators are also released with a short delay following the reference period. However, survey measures based 
on manufacturing capture less than a fifth of the economy and do not take into account the development of slack in the labour market. Surveys of capacity utilisation 
or insufficient demand in manufacturing indicate that, in mid-2015, slack in the euro 
area is close to its historical average (see
 Chart B).A new survey-based measure of slack maps the results of the European 
Commission™s ﬁfactors limiting productionﬂ survey to 
GDP dynamics.
 In this 
survey, managers are asked about the main factors currently limiting their production. 
The answer ﬁinsufficient demand limiting productionﬂ was selected as the indicator 
of slack for the model. The survey indicator, which 
combines information on the manufacturing, construction 
and services sectors, where available (see Chart C), 
is used in a bivariate unobserved components model. 
In the model, actual output is equal to the sum of 

(unobserved) trend output and the measure of slack. 
The growth rate of trend output is modelled as a random 
walk, and slack is determined by developments in the 
aggregate survey indicator.
For most of the period since 1999, the survey-based measure shows an estimate of slack similar to the latest estimates by the European Commission, the OECD and the IMF.
 However, according to the survey-
based measure, the amount of slack in the period 
2014-15 is declining relatively fast. As a result, the 
amount of slack according to this measure is currently smaller than that estimated by international institutions (see Chart D). Since the survey-based measure draws Chart BCapacity utilisation and demand limiting production in manufacturing(percentage point deviations from historical average)-20-10020104030-12-9-6-30
36capacity utilisation in manufacturing (left-hand side)insufficient demand in manufacturing (right-hand side)199920022005200820112014Source: European Commission.Chart CInsufficient demand limiting production
(percentage shares of total responses)70605040
3020100manufacturingconstructionservices199920022005200820112014Source: European Commission.Chart DSlack in the euro area(percentage point deviation from trend)-5-4
-3
-2-10123
4199920022005200820112014output gap by OECDsurvey-based measure of slackoutput gap by European Commissionoutput gap by IMFSources: ECB staff calculations, European Commission Spring 2015 Economic Forecast, 
IMF World Economic Outlook April 2015 and OECD Economic Outlook May 2015.
Note: The grey area represents a +/-2 standard deviation uncertainty band around the 

survey-based measure.51information from firms™ assessments of insufficient demand limiting their production, 
the decline in slack could suggest that growth in the euro area since 2014 reflects an improvement in demand, rather than in supply conditions.The survey question relating to ﬁinsufficient 
demand limiting productionﬂ helps to pin down developments in slack in the model, and this also results in smaller revisions. Recursive estimates show that, over most of the period 2000-14, the survey-based measure produces smaller differences between 
quasi real-time and ex post estimates than output gap 
estimates by international institutions. Using GDP 
vintages to create real-time estimates shows that, for the most volatile period of 2007-12, revisions are the smallest for the (annualised) survey-based measure of slack. Revisions of the European Commission™s 

output gap estimates are somewhat larger. The largest 
revisions are seen for the OECD and IMF estimates (see Chart E).Overall, the survey-based measure of slack indicates a smaller amount of slack in the euro area in 2015 than the published estimates of international institutions. While the measure of slack indicated by the survey-based approach is surrounded by uncertainty, and cannot be 

broken down into labour, capital and total factor productivity developments, it tends 

to be revised less frequently. Thus, using such measures to complement output gap 
estimates of production function-based models could be worthwhile.Chart ERevisions of estimates of slack(percentage points)01
234200720082009201020112012averageoutput gap by OECD output gap by IMF output gap by European Commission survey-based measure of slack Sources: OECD, IMF, European Commission and ECB staff calculations.
52Box 7  Recent developments in euro area food 
pricesDevelopments in food prices have reinforced the pattern of euro area inflation driven by energy prices in recent quarters. This holds in respect of both the decline in the contribution to headline inflation in 2014 and its rebound during the first few months of 2015 (see Chart A) Œ a pattern of decrease and 
recovery visible in prices of both unprocessed and processed food. As food price inflation can be subject 

to considerable volatility, this box examines the factors 
behind recent developments in order to gain a better understanding of the rebound.Recent movements in unprocessed food price 
inflation are largely explained by developments in 
fruit and vegetable prices. These account for most of 
the decline in the annual growth rate (from around 5% in 

mid-2013 to a historic low of almost -3% in mid-2014) 
 and most of the rebound to positive growth rates 

(of around 2% in mid-2015; see Chart B). Seasonal 
factors typically play an important role here. Much of 
the decline in fruit and vegetable prices in early 2014 
reflects the mild winter of 2013-14 in conjunction with 
the unwinding of earlier upward impacts resulting from 

adverse weather conditions. The rebound to positive 
annual growth rates in the first half of 2015 thus reflects 
both the relatively subdued price developments one 
year earlier and the relatively strong price movements in 
2015 (see Chart C). 
Recent movements in processed food price inflation are explained by different factors. First, the upturn in early 2015 partly reflects a somewhat 
larger contribution from tobacco prices, which are often 
subject to the impact of tax measures (see Chart D). Second, like energy prices, processed food prices can 
be heavily influenced by developments in international commodity prices. Nevertheless, for the euro area,  EU internal market prices measured at the farm gate rather than international commodity prices are typically more relevant for the pass-through to consumer food prices. Both international food prices and EU internal Chart AContribution of food price developments to HICP 
inflation (annual percentage changes; percentage points)-2 -1 0 
1 2 3 
4 5 20082009201020112012201320142015HICP excluding food and energy energy food 
HICP Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.
Chart BUnprocessed food price inflation (annual percentage changes; percentage points)-4 -2 0 2 4 
6 20082009201020112012201320142015vegetables fruit  meat and fish unprocessed food prices Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Note: No breakdown is yet available for the latest observations, which are for 

53market prices (see Chart E) have declined since 2014 and showed tentative signs of stabilisation in early 2015. Downward pressure on commodity prices and also prices of processed food continues to come in particular from the respective dairy components, which are currently also subject to special influences. Barring further decreases in commodity prices, a fading out of such 
factors should make the rebound in processed food prices more sustained.A special factor currently affecting food price inflation (both in terms of unprocessed and processed food products) is the Russian ban on 
imports from the European Union. The Russian ban became effective in mid-2014 and may have prevented 

a stronger recovery in food prices. Indeed, anecdotal evidence at the time pointed to a negative impact on prices of unprocessed food such as apples and 
processed food such as dairy products. However, the 
European Commission responded by activating support measures for perishable fruit and vegetables which may have mitigated the downward pressure on prices resulting from an excess supply of such goods.1 The extension of the Russian embargo and the mitigating support measures should continue to dampen prices of unprocessed foods. 1 In early August 2014, in line with the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), the European Commission 
announced emergency market support measures for perishable fruit and vegetables, which have 
been used to purchase fruit and vegetables at full price from farmers, or to compensate them for not 
harvesting their produce. On 30 July 2015 these measures were extended for another year, until 
30 June 2016.Chart CIntra-annual pattern of euro area fruit and vegetable prices(index: January = 100)95 100 105 
110 115 Jan.Jan.Feb.Mar.Apr.MayJuneJulyAug.Sep.Oct.Nov.Dec.standard deviationaverage developments over the past ten years (2004-14) developments since January 2015 developments since January 2014 Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Note: The green shaded area indicates a one standard deviation increase/decrease in 

the index levels for each month relative to their level in January of the previous year 
over the period 2004-14.Chart DProcessed food price inflation (annual percentage changes; percentage points)-2024
6
820082009201020112012201320142015tobacco milk, cheese and eggs prices  
other processed food prices Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Note: No breakdown is yet available for the latest observations, which are for 

Chart EDevelopments in EU internal market prices (EUR; index: January 2008 = 100, non-seasonally adjusted)607080
901001101201302008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015EU internal market prices dairy prices Sources: European Commission and ECB calculations.Note: The latest observations are for July 2015.
54The expiration of EU milk output quotas in March 2015 is a special factor that has affected prices of dairy products in particular.
 During the past few years, in anticipation of the abolition of these quotas, EU dairy farmers increased their production for world export markets and thus raised their exposure to changes in global demand. Presently, increased competition and excess supply in the wake of 
lower demand from Russia and some emerging economies are weighing on prices.  If there is no pick-up in global demand, some of the downward pressure on food 
price inflation may fade only gradually.
Overall, rising food prices contributed to the rebound in inflation in early 2015 supported by significant base effects. Food price inflation, however, remains 
rather low by historical standards. Special factors, such as the Russian ban on EU food imports, the oversupply of dairy products stemming from the abolition of milk quotas and lower than expected global demand, are presently limiting increases in food prices.55Box 8 Country-specific recommendations for 
fiscal policies under the 2015 European 
SemesterOn 25-26 June the European Council endorsed country-specific recommendations for economic and fiscal policies for 26 non-programme EU Member States.1 These recommendations were adopted by the economic and 
finance ministers on 14 July to formally conclude the 2015 European Semester. The 

Council™s fiscal policy recommendations aim to ensure that countries comply with 
the EU™s Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). To this end, they give opinions on the 
2015 updates to stability and convergence programmes, which governments had to submit to the Council and the European Commission by mid-April.2 These opinions 
take account of the Commission™s communication on flexibility within the SGP which 
was released in January this year.
3 In terms of follow-up work, the country-specific recommendations for fiscal policies issued under the 2015 European Semester will 
need to be reflected in the draft budgetary plans for 2016 which countries have to submit to the Eurogroup and the Council by mid-October. Against this background, 
this box reviews the recommendations for fiscal policies that were addressed to the 17 euro area countries under the 2015 European Semester and identifies the implications for their budgetary plans for 2016.The European Council™s country-specific recommendations identify risks of 
non-compliance with the structural effort requirements of the SGP in 12 of 
the 17 euro area countries under review. Overall, although the five euro area 

non-programme countries (Ireland, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain and France) currently 
subject to an excessive deficit procedure (EDP) are required to make, on average, 
structural efforts equivalent to 0.7% and 0.9% of GDP in 2015 and 2016 respectively 
in order to ensure compliance with the SGP, the average figures in a ﬁno policy-
change scenarioﬂ are actually expected to be slightly negative in both years.4 In turn, 
the 12 euro area countries under the SGP™s preventive arm are required to progress 
towards their medium-term budgetary objectives with structural efforts amounting to 

0.2% of GDP on aggregate over 2015-16, yet the figures for this period are expected 
1 This includes all EU Member States except Cyprus and Greece.
2 These programmes outline governments™ budgetary plans for at least the current and subsequent three 
years. For an overview, see European Commission, ﬁThe 2015 stability and convergence programmes 

Œ an overviewﬂ, Institutional Paper, No 2, July 2015, Brussels. 3 On 13 January the European Commission issued a Communication entitled ﬁMaking the best use of 

the flexibility within the existing rules of the Stability and Growth Pactﬂ (http://ec.europa.eu/economy_

finance/economic_governance/sgp/pdf/2015-01- 13_communication_sgp_flexibility_guidelines_en.pdf). 

See also the box entitled ﬁFlexibility within the Stability and Growth Pactﬂ, 
Economic Bulletin, Issue 1, 2015. 4 Under the SGP™s corrective arm, the Council abrogated Malta™s excessive deficit by the 2014 EDP 

deadline. At the same time, it decided against initiating an EDP for Finland, although the breach of 

the 3% of GDP reference value in 2014 is not forecast to be temporary, with the deficit not expected to 

return to below the reference value until 2016.56to be slightly negative.5 The fiscal policy recommendations therefore call on eight 
Member States (Belgium, Estonia, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Austria and Finland) 
to make structural efforts commensurate with the preventive arm of the SGP. Two 
Member States (Belgium and Italy) also face large consolidation gaps with respect 
to the debt rule. The required improvement in the structural balance under the 
debt rule in 2015 is equivalent to 2.1% of GDP for Italy (resulting from cumulated 
consolidation shortfalls since 2013) Œ which compares with a forecast for structural 
efforts amounting to 0.3% of GDP Œ and 1.1% of GDP for Belgium (resulting from 

cumulated consolidation shortfalls since 2014) Œ which compares with a forecast for 
structural efforts amounting to 0.5% of GDP. These requirements are not reflected in 
the 2015 country-specific recommendations for Italy and Belgium, as the Commission 
has concluded that the deviation from the debt rule can be explained by relevant 
factors, such as unfavourable economic conditions and the implementation of 

structural reforms. In many countries, interest expenditure was lower than initially 
budgeted. At the same time, instead of using the savings from lower than expected 
interest payments to accelerate deficit adjustment, many Member States increased 
5 See also the box entitled ﬁThe effectiveness of the medium-term budgetary objective as an anchor of 
fiscal policiesﬂ, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, Frankfurt.Table
Country-specific fiscal developments in 2015 and 2016 CountrySGP commitment              
(change in the structural balance; percentage of GDP Œ if not at MTO)European Commission  
spring 2015 forecast (change in the structural 
balance; percentage of 
GDP)Annual consolidation gap (difference between European Commission spring 2015 forecast and commitment Œ if not at MTO)Memo: change 
in interest 
expenditure; 
 percentage of GDP 
between 2014 and 
2016 (European 
Commission spring 
2015 forecast)2015201620152016201520162015-2016  
(cumulated)Preventive arm   
Belgium0.60.60.50.2-0.1-0.4-0.4Germanyat MTO
at MTO
-0.2-0.3at MTO
at MTO
-0.3Estonia-0.20.4-0.5-0.3-0.4-0.70.0Italy0.250.10.3-0.20.0-0.3-0.4Latvia-0.40.3-0.3-0.30.1-0.6-0.2Lithuania0.20.5-0.70.7-0.90.2-0.2Luxembourgat MTO
at MTO
-1.0-0.2at MTO
at MTO
0.0Malta0.60.60.50.6-0.10.0-0.3Netherlandsat MTO
at MTO
-0.1-0.1at MTO
at MTO
-0.1Austria-0.060.3-0.4-0.6-0.3-0.8-0.1Slovakia0.00.250.20.00.2-0.2-0.4Finland0.10.5-0.2-0.4-0.3-0.9-0.1Corrective arm (EDP)  
EDP deadline
2015Ireland*1.90.60.50.3-1.4-0.3-0.6Portugal*0.50.6-0.8-0.6-1.3-1.2-0.4Slovenia*0.50.60.1-0.5-0.4-1.1-0.32016Spain0.81.2-0.4-0.2-1.2-1.4-0.32017France0.50.80.30.0-0.2-0.8-0.1
Commission™s 2015 spring forecast.


EDP prior to the ﬁsix-pack reformﬂ and is thus required to deliver an annual average structural effort in the absence of annual targets. * Structural effort requirements for 2016 

as applicable under the preventive arm, assuming a timely abrogation of the EDP by the 2015 deadline. Structural effort requirements under the SGP™s preventive arm exclude 

requirements under the debt rule. Figures are rounded up, except where they refer to SGP commitments.
57primary spending (i.e. government expenditure excluding interest payments) relative 
to their initial plans. Countries faced with high general government debt ratios 
(Belgium, France, Italy, Ireland and Portugal) are therefore advised to use any so-
called windfall gains, i.e. savings from lower than anticipated interest payments, for 
deficit reductions. Moreover, of the countries that have already met their medium-
term budgetary objectives, Germany has been advised to further increase public 
investment in infrastructure, education and research, while the Netherlands has been 
advised to shift public expenditure towards supporting investment in research and 

development. 
The 2015 European Semester, which is the fifth surveillance cycle since 
its inception, followed a streamlined approach aimed at issuing fewer and more targeted recommendations. This reorganisation entailed, inter alia, earlier 
publication of European Commission analyses and recommendations in order to enhance dialogue with Member States. Overall, the 2015 country-specific recommendations appropriately reflect countries™ risks of non-compliance with the 

EU™s fiscal rules, while identifying the major areas for reform. To this end, they follow 
the broad fiscal policy guidance issued for this European Semester in the 2015 Annual Growth Survey, namely ﬁ[..] pursuing fiscal responsibilityﬂ.
6  In general, the European Semester process can only be effective in increasing fiscal sustainability if 
non-compliance with the EU™s fiscal rules is appropriately identified and addressed. 
In this context, the so-called five presidents™ report published in June
7 proposes the establishment of a new European fiscal board, which would provide public and independent assessments of countries™ budgetary policies vis-à-vis their obligations 
under the EU™s fiscal framework. These would then feed into the decisions taken 
by the European Commission in the context of the European Semester. The report 
also proposes a more integrated European Semester, with national parliaments 
being involved more. Looking ahead, in the light of persistent vulnerabilities such as high government debt and sizeable structural deficits in euro area countries, 
any potential reforms of the European Semester should not weaken the ambition of recommendations for budgetary policies.Fiscal policies should support the recovery, while remaining compliant 
 with the Stability and Growth Pact. Full and consistent implementation is key for  confidence in our fiscal framework. The draft budgetary plans for 2016 should 
therefore clarify how governments whose structural efforts fall short of their 
commitments under the SGP intend to follow up on the country-specific 

recommendations in order to ensure compliance with the EU™s fiscal rules by 
reducing their deficits faster. With bond yields subject to volatility, the budgetary plans 
of high-debt countries in particular should allow for risks related to a reversal of the current low interest rate environment.6 See European Commission, ﬁAnnual Growth Survey 2015ﬂ, November 2014, Brussels (http://ec.europa.
eu/europe2020/pdf/2015/ags2015_en.pdf).7 See the report prepared by Jean-Claude Juncker, in close cooperation with Donald Tusk, Jeroen 

Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi and Martin Schulz, entitled ﬁCompleting Europe™s Economic and Monetary 

Unionﬂ, 2015, Brussels.58Articles The state of the house price cycle  
in the euro area This article discusses the current state of the euro area house price cycle and compares it with historical patterns. It finds that the recovery in house prices in the euro area has been rather muted thus far and appears to be weaker than the typical increase observed historically during the initial phase of an upturn in the house price cycle. At the same time, corrections of previous overvaluations, together with 
favourable income and financing conditions, suggest that the current recovery has a better chance of being sustained than the short-lived upturn observed relatively  soon after the crisis. A gradual and sustained recovery in the house price cycle 
would support economic developments. At the same time, the accompanying credit 
dynamics have thus far remained muted, limiting the build-up of systemic risks to the euro area financial system. The new macroprudential toolkit is also helping to mitigate possible risks in a targeted and granular way.
1 IntroductionHouse prices have been a key indicator in assessing the state of the euro area economy since the financial crisis. This reflects the general importance that the 
housing sector tends to have for the timing and amplitude of the business cycle and, 
in particular, its specific importance in the aftermath of a boom-bust episode. In 
 a number of euro area countries, house prices had increased at unsustainable rates 
and to unsustainable levels prior to the crisis, and the inevitable adjustments had subsequently led to declines in house prices or muted developments at best. After some ups and downs during a protracted period of adjustment, there  are now increasing signs that house prices in the euro area are finally on the rise again. Measured in terms of the annual rate of change in residential property 
prices, the cycle reached a low point in early 2013 before the rates of change became 
 successively less negative and moved into positive territory in the second half 
of 2014. This recovery does not appear to have been very strong thus far, but the 
upward path of the growth rate is relatively broad-based across euro area countries. Against this background, it is instructive to analyse the various factors underlying  the nascent recovery in house prices, as well as its strength and sustainability 
 going forward.Understanding the state and nature of the house price cycle is important from 
both a macroeconomic and financial stability point of view. This is because it is 
linked to the business and financial cycles, with house prices affecting credit markets, 
as they determine the value of collateral that households can borrow and banks can 
lend against. Tellingly, the collateral channel had shown its importance in the context 
59of the financial crisis and the banking sector problems that emerged in its aftermath 
in some euro area countries. Going forward, house price developments deserve 
particular scrutiny in a low interest rate environment given the complex links between 
residential property prices, economic activity and credit dynamics.This article discusses the recent developments in, and current outlook for, house 
prices across the euro area, focusing on price developments in residential real estate and abstracting from those in commercial real estate (Section 2). It then compares the ongoing house price and credit cycles with previous ones (Section 3), before elaborating on the interaction between house price developments, the real economy and the banking sector (Section 4). 2 Recent developments and current outlook 
 for house pricesRecent developments in euro area residential property prices suggest that the corner has been turned and a recovery is underway. 
The annual rate of change in house prices started to increase in mid-2013, turning mildly positive in the second half of 2014. There were similar signs in
 2009-10, relatively soon after the financial crisis, but the recovery could not be sustained, given the unfolding of the euro area sovereign debt crisis. In this context, it is instructive to assess the sustainability of the nascent, but still subdued, recovery for the euro area as a whole by looking at the different factors underpinning it.
First, the recovery in euro area house prices 

appears to be relatively broad-based across groups 

of countries. With contributions to euro area house 
price growth from Germany and Austria remaining 
solidly positive, the upturn in the annual growth rate 
since early 2013 essentially reflects a gradual easing 
of the negative contributions from the countries most 

affected by the financial crisis (Ireland, Greece, Spain, 
Italy, Cyprus, Portugal and Slovenia). To a somewhat 
lesser extent, this also holds for the group of other euro 
area countries (excluding Germany and Austria) (see 
Chart 1). These broad-based contributions towards 
positive euro area house price growth differ from those 
in the upturn of 2009-10, 
 when the countries most affected by the financial crisis 
continued to contribute negatively and the upturn 
mainly reflected a strong rebound in house price growth 
in the other countries. 
Second, the current recovery in euro area house price growth seems less contingent on prices in metropolitan areas than in 2009-10. Aggregating selected countries for which data are available shows Chart 1Euro area residential property prices by groups of countries(year-on-year percentage changes and percentage point contributions)-6.0-4.0
-2.00.02.04.0
6.0
8.0200620072008200920102011201220132014contribution from other countries (excluding Germany and Austria)
contribution from Germany and Austria
contribution from countries most affected by the financial crisis
euro area nominal residential property prices
Sources: ECB calculations based on national data. 

Spain, Italy, Cyprus, Portugal and Slovenia. Last observations were for Q1 2015 for 

all countries except Belgium, Slovakia and Finland, where the last observation was for 
Q4 2014.60that house prices in metropolitan areas have been growing faster since the financial crisis than in the economy as a whole (see Chart 2). There may be 
geographical reasons for this, such as less availability of land and a correspondingly lower elasticity of housing supply in metropolitan areas than rural areas. However, this may also imply that house price dynamics 
in metropolitan areas could pick up faster in response to the economic cycle and then provide false signals if the latter is not sustained. In recent quarters the growth rate differential between growth in metropolitan and 
economy-wide house prices has remained relatively stable, while the upturn in house prices observed 
in 2009-10 was characterised by a much stronger acceleration in metropolitan areas than elsewhere, which subsequently also unwound much faster. As with 
the individual countries, house price dynamics in the euro area as a whole also seem to have been more 
balanced recently in terms of location, thus providing a better starting point for a sustained recovery than a few years ago.Third, the current recovery is taking place in an environment where earlier imbalances in house prices have resulted in substantial corrections. In several countries, in particular those most affected 
by the financial crisis, large rises in house prices in the run-up to 2007 were followed by falls in the 2007-13 period, i.e. preceding the current upturn. This suggests some correction of the imbalances that had built 
up in the pre-crisis period, when a number of countries saw very strong growth in house prices Œ double-digit in some cases (see Chart 3). It also explains why house prices are currently rising again at a faster pace in some of these countries, such as Ireland and Spain, in an environment of improving macroeconomic and favourable 
financing conditions. Countries which have experienced relatively strong house price growth since 2007, especially recently (such as Germany and Austria), are the 
ones that saw more moderate growth in the period up to 2007 and did not require a correction thereafter. The notion of a correction of imbalances also comes through 
when looking at developments in house prices as a ratio to income (measured in terms of GDP). Countries which had the largest increases in this ratio in the period 
up to 2007 by and large also saw the smallest increases or biggest declines in the period 2007-13 (see Chart 4). In some countries, such as Spain, Ireland and Greece, the declines were even larger than the previous increases.Measuring the degree of house price imbalances and the corresponding need for corrections is surrounded by considerable uncertainty. 
This reflects the complex interaction between the housing, rental and mortgage markets, different 
structural characteristics between these markets across countries, as well as data Chart 2Euro area residential property prices at the metropolitan and aggregate level(Ratio Q1 2010 = 100 and year-on-year percentage changes)-6-4
-2024
6
8
10
12859095100
105
110
115
120
125
1302008200920102011201220132014euro area ratio of property prices index in big cities vis-à-vis the national aggregate index (left-hand scale)property prices: capital city/big cities annual growth rate (right-hand scale)property prices: aggregate annual growth rate (right-hand scale)interquartile range of the euro area ratio (left-hand scale)Sources: ECB calculations based on BIS and national sources.Notes: The euro area ratio is an aggregation of country ratios including Austria, 

Belgium, Germany, Estonia, Spain, France and Italy up to 2010 and also Ireland, 

Slovenia and Finland since 2010, and using GDP weights. The shaded area refers to 

the interquartile range of country ratios (25th to 75th percentile). Different coverage 

and data sources may account for differences from the aggregate property price 

developments reported in Chart 1. The last observations were for Q4 2014.
61constraints and measurement issues.1 The house 
price-to-income ratio is one of the available valuation indicators and represents a crude measure of housing affordability. When the indicator lies above its long-term 
average, house prices may be seen as overvalued Œ at least from the perspective of prospective new buyers Œ which should lead to downward pressures on prices. Since 2010 the imbalance in the house 
price-to-income ratio for the euro area as a whole has progressively unwound. In 2014 it was only around 3% above its fundamental level, suggesting that house prices were broadly back in line with fundamentals. This reflects in particular the unwinding in the group 
of countries most affected by the financial crisis, 
which between 2007 and 2010 had seen relatively little adjustment (see Chart 5). Considering that the affordability of housing and house prices are also 
determined by the costs of servicing mortgage debt, the basic house price-to-income indicator can be 
augmented with interest rates, either by an annuity-based or a regression-based approach.2 These augmented affordability measures suggest that 
1 For a discussion, see the box entitled ﬁStatistical valuation metrics for residential property marketsﬂ, 
Financial Stability Review, ECB, May 2015.2 The annuity-based measure augments the house price-to-income ratio as follows: r/(1-(1+r)^(-T))*
 
(house price index)/(income index) where T is the mortgage length and r is the nominal mortgage 
interest rate. Typically, a mortgage length of 20 years and a fixed mortgage interest rate are assumed. 
The degree of over/undervaluation is then calculated as the deviation in percentage terms of the 
augmented ratio from its long-term average. Alternatively, house prices can be regressed on income 
and mortgage interest rates and the residuals are taken as the valuation estimates. Chart 4House price-to-GDP ratios in the run-up to, and 
unwinding of, the financial crisis(average annual percentage changes; x-axis:2007-2013, y-axis: 2001-2007)EABEDEIEGRESFRITCYMTNLATFIPT-10-8-6-4
-2024
681045 degreeline -10-8-6-4-20246810Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Notes: See Chart 3.Chart 3House price growth in the run-up to, and unwinding of, the financial crisis(average annual percentage changes; x-axis: 2007-2013, y-axis: 2001-2007)EABEDEIEGRESFRITCYMTNLATFIPT-16-12-8-404
812
1645 degreeline-16-12-8-40481216Source: ECB calculations based on national data.

Italy, Cyprus and Portugal which are shown with a yellow dot. Data for Estonia, Latvia, 

Lithuania, Luxembourg, Slovenia and Slovakia are not available for the full sample. For 
Cyprus, the pre-crisis average is computed for the period 2002-07.Chart 5Euro area house price-to-income ratios(percentage point deviations from long-term average and percentage point contributions)-15-10-505101520200620072008200920102011201220132014contribution from other countries
contribution from countries most affected by the financial crisishouse price-to-income ratio (basic)
ratio adjusted using annuity formula
ratio adjusted using quadratic formula for interest rate
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and ECB calculations.Notes: The long-term average is computed over the period since Q1 1996. Disposable 

income per household is used as the proxy for income. The interest rate is the average 

mortgage interest rate. Footnote 2 in the main text explains the adjustment methods. The 



Portugal and Slovenia and their contribution to the euro area ratio is shown in green. 
62average house prices may currently even be moderately below historically normal valuation levels. However, the boost to housing affordability coming from the current 
low interest rate environment may not be fully sustainable if interest rates were to normalise further out.Besides starting from a more balanced position than in 2009-10, there are also other factors supporting a more sustained recovery in house prices. One is related to the improving income and employment prospects for households that 
are associated with the ongoing economic recovery, which should boost demand 
for housing and lead to stronger house price growth. European Commission survey figures indicate that households™ intentions to purchase a house in the next two years 

have shown some signs of improvement since the end of 2012, but are still below the longer-term average since 1999. This is likely to continue, since expectations for 
economic growth one and two years ahead are currently higher than in 2009-10 and there is a prospect of financing conditions remaining favourable in an environment where non-standard monetary policy measures have been designed to keep interest 
rates low for some time to come. Bank lending rates and credit standards have become increasingly favourable in recent quarters. This clearly works as a second supporting factor: since the 
end of the last recession in early 2013 the improvement in financing conditions and the upturn in the house price cycle have coincided. Notwithstanding some heterogeneity across countries, lending rates in the euro area for loans for house purchase declined by more than 90 basis points from that point (see Chart 6), while credit standards became successively less tight and eventually eased over the same period (see Chart 7). Improving housing market prospects have been an important 
element in the easing of credit standards, suggesting that a sustained improvement Chart 6Mortgage lending rates in the euro area and selected countries(percentages)12
3
4
56200320042005200620072008200920102011201220132014recessionseuro areaNetherlandsGermanyItalyBelgiumFranceSpainAustriaSource: ECB. 

Cycle Dating Committee. The rates refer to the composite lending rate for house 



moving average of new business volumes. The most recent observations are for Q2 2015.
Chart 7Credit standards for loans for house purchases and housing market prospects(net percentages; a higher value indicates tightening)-10010203040502003200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015recessionscredit standardshousing market prospectsSource: ECB euro area bank lending survey.

Cycle Dating Committee. Backward-looking three months. Weighted net percentages 
are obtained as tightened minus eased. The most recent observations are for Q3 2015.
63in housing market prospects due to factors other than credit standards could be reinforced if the latter were to be relaxed further. The chances of these other 
factors that determine credit standards remaining favourable are good, because the tightening of credit standards in 2011-12
 was initially more a result of the unfolding sovereign debt crisis Œ through the impact of the increasing cost of funds and balance sheet constraints triggered by the crisis Œ than of housing market prospects becoming less favourable.The prevailing low interest rate environment could also further sustain housing 
demand and stimulate house prices from an investment portfolio perspective. 
Housing can be viewed not only as a consumption good, but also as an investment 

good, the return on which can be assessed and compared with alternative investments. 
In the current prevailing low interest rate environment, housing could become 
comparatively more appealing as an investment for households and/or investors if it 
promises higher expected returns compared with, for example, bank deposits, securities 
such as government bonds, or equity investments. Estimates of the return on residential 

housing are only available for selected euro area countries (Germany, Austria, the 
Netherlands and France) and are surrounded by considerable uncertainty.
3 Broad as 
such a comparison naturally is, it indicates that annual returns on residential housing 

in these countries have generally been higher in recent years (such as 2011
 and 2014) 
than the prevailing nominal long-term yields on government bonds, nominal yields on 
bank deposits and the dividend yield of the corresponding national equity markets, and 
that these differentials widened further between
 2011
 and 2014 (see Chart 8). Overall, 
the relative return on housing in recent years compares favourably with 2008, when 
returns on housing were lower than deposit yields and government bond yields.3 The estimates of income return are from the IPD Quarterly Research Database and reflect residential 
property portfolios for institutional investors. These portfolios are likely to invest predominantly in 
the prime or close-to-prime market, a sector which is likely to have a different dynamic to the entire 
residential market. In addition, alternative asset classes are characterised by a different level of risk 
and a corresponding risk premium, and the total return of each asset class is ultimately determined 
by the stream of income obtained (in terms of rents, dividends and interest payments) plus the 
appreciation/depreciation of the underlying asset, which is not explicitly considered in this analysis.Chart 8Returns on housing investment relative to those of alternative assets(percentage points)-1.0-0.50.0
0.51.01.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.02003200820112014200320082011201420032008201120142003200820112014GermanyAustriaNetherlandsFrancecomposite deposit rate10-year government bond yield
dividend yield (equity)Sources: IPD, DataStream and ECB calculations.Notes: The income return on residential housing is the net annual income receivable as a percentage of the capital employed. The composite deposit rate is the MFI interest rate on 

deposits from households with agreed maturity (total original maturity, new business coverage).
643 Stylised facts of house price cycles in the euro areaAssessing the current state of the house price cycle and the prospects for a further recovery draws on comparisons with historical patterns. In particular, 
it is informative to analyse how cycles in euro area house prices have evolved in 
relation to both the business and credit cycles, as the states of these cycles can condition each other. The analysis looks at the corresponding variables Œ house 
prices, GDP and MFI loans to households Œ in real terms in order to account for 
differences in average inflation rates over the past few decades. 
The real house price cycle is broadly aligned with both the business and credit 
cycles. This alignment is summarised in the overall strong degree of co-movement 
between the real house price cycle and the business and credit cycles respectively 
(see Chart 9). The maximum correlation between annual real house price growth and 
annual real GDP growth is about
 60%, while that between annual real house price 
growth and annual real household loan growth is about 70%. In both cases, it is found 
at broadly coincident level. The alignment is particularly apparent during recessions 
(see Chart 10). All euro area recessions since
 1980 have been accompanied by 

decreasing, and eventually negative, real house price growth, which started to recover 
only after the trough in real economic activity had been passed. In turn, periods of 
negative real house price growth are typically preceded by a strong deceleration in 
real loans, although the growth rate for the latter has rarely turned negative. Unlike 
in the run-up to recessions, real loan growth does not appear to lead the house price 
cycle in the recovery phases after a recession. Against this background, the expected 
recovery in real GDP growth in the coming quarters and the recent
 mild upturn in 
the household credit cycle support the view that the real house price cycle is likely to 
continue to recover at moderate levels in the short to medium term.Chart 9Cross-correlations of real GDP growth and real household 
loan growth with respect to real house price growth(percentages)+12+10+8+6+4+20-2-4-6-8-10-12real household loan growthreal GDP growth-40-30
-20-1001020
304050
60
70
80real house price growth lagsreal house price growth leads+12+10+8+6+4+20-2-4-6-8-10-12real household loan growthreal GDP growthSources: Eurostat, ECB and ECB calculations.Notes: Correlations between annual growth rates of real house price growth (deflated 
by the HICP) with, respectively, real GDP annual growth rates and real MFI loans to 

household annual growth rates (deflated by the HICP), using data from Q1 1980 to 
Q1 2015.Chart 10Euro area real GDP, real house prices and real loans 
to households(year-on-year percentage changes)-8-6
-4-202
4
681012
14198119851989199319972001200520092013recessionsreal residential property pricesreal loans to householdsreal GDPSources: Eurostat and ECB.



by the CEPR Euro Area Business Cycle Dating Committee. The most recent 

observations are for Q1 2015.65Upturns in the house price cycle are, on average, stronger and longer-lasting than downturns. Looking at ten euro area countries from the first quarter of 1970 to the fourth quarter of 2014 (a sample dictated by the availability of the data), 37 major 
real house price increases and 43 major real house price decreases can be identified.4 On average, major upturns see real house prices grow by around 50% over a period of about five years, while major downturns are characterised by a 
smaller amplitude and shorter duration, decreasing by about 16% on average over a period of around three years. A subset of these major episodes includes outright 

boom-bust instances, which may last longer. Developments during major upturns 
and downturns can be used to derive benchmark paths against which to assess the latest downturns and upturns in euro area real house prices. The fall in euro area real house prices after 2007 was broadly in line with historical patterns. This assessment can be gleaned by comparing developments in 
real house prices in the euro area and in selected countries around the most recent peak in euro area aggregate real house prices with a benchmark downturn path (see Chart 11). This benchmark path is derived on the basis of the aforementioned 

historical episodes, depicted by interquartile ranges of historical increases and decreases (i.e. abstracting from the extreme developments found in the upper and lower quartiles). The comparison points to significant country heterogeneity in post-
peak house price developments. The decline was much more marked in countries 
which had also seen a much stronger house price boom preceding the peak (such 
as Spain) than in those which experienced more stable house prices both before and after the peak (such as Germany). As regards the credit cycle, real household loans 
4 Identification of ﬁmajorﬂ house price cycles follows Claessens et al.: ﬁWhat happens during recessions, 
crunches and busts?ﬂ, Economic Policy, Vol. 24, 2009, pp. 653-700. A quarterly version of the Bry-Boschan algorithm identifies local maxima (peaks) and minima (troughs) for peak-to-peak and trough-
to-trough cycles that last at least five quarters and phases that last at least two quarters. Episodes of 
ongoing cyclical increases and decreases in real house prices, as well as those which lasted less than 
a year and those in the lower quartile (i.e. episodes characterised by minor changes) are excluded. Chart 11
Real house prices around the 2007 peak(indices, normalised to 100 at T=peak, with T=Q3 2007 for the euro area and 
euro area countries shown)5060
70
80
90100
110
120T-20T-12T-4T+4T+12T+20euro areaFranceSpainGermanyItalyNetherlandsSources: BIS, ECB, national sources and ECB calculations.Notes: Grey area delimits interquartile range of developments around peaks for the 
sample considered (Q1 1970-Q4 2014). Chart 12Real MFI loans to households around the 2007 peak(indices, normalised to 100 at T=peak, with T=Q3 2007 for the euro area and euro area 
countries shown)4050
60708090100110120
130140T-20T-12T-4T+4T+12T+20euro areaFranceGermanySpain
ItalyNetherlandsSources: BIS, ECB, national sources and ECB calculations.Notes: Grey area delimits interquartile range of developments in real household loans 
around peaks of real house prices for the sample considered (Q1 1970-Q4 2014). 66tend to stabilise or even increase for several quarters after the cycle for real house price peaks (see Chart 12). Marked heterogeneity also characterises the pattern of real household loan cycles by country along the latest euro area real house price peak. Overall, the fact that the latest downturn in euro area real house prices appears to be broadly in line with historical declines may lead to an expectation that 
the subsequent recovery is also likely to be in line with upturns in recent decades. However, the current euro area real house price upturn has been somewhat 

weaker than the typical increase observed historically during the initial phase 
of the upturn. This also appears to be the case for most euro area countries 
(see Chart 13). Indeed, since the latest euro area trough in 2013, only some 
countries (such as Germany) have seen an upturn in real house prices, while in others (such as Spain and the Netherlands) there has only been a broad stabilisation followed by a mild increase in prices, or even a further decline (as in France and Italy). These different patterns reflect several factors, including the heterogeneous 
current state of the business cycle across countries and country-specific policy 
measures affecting housing and mortgage markets. As regards the credit cycle, 
real household loans appear to increase markedly both before and after real house price increases start (see Chart 14). As with recent real house price increases, the 
latest real household loan increases also appear to be weaker than during typical real house price upturns. This is also the case for most euro area countries. Thus, 

the most recent household loan developments only seem to have heralded, so far, 
relatively moderate increase in real house prices in the short to medium run.Chart 13Real house prices around the 2013 trough(indices, normalised to 100 at T=trough, with T=Q4 2013 for the euro area and euro 
area countries shown)8090100
110120130140
150160T-20T-12T-4T+4T+12T+20euro areaFranceSpainGermanyItaly
NetherlandsSources: BIS, ECB, national sources and ECB calculations.Notes: Grey area delimits interquartile range of developments in real house prices 

around troughs for the sample considered (Q1 1970-Q4 2014). 
Chart 14Real MFI loans to households around the 2013 trough(indices, normalised to 100 at T=trough, with T=Q4 2013 for the euro area and euro 
area countries shown)6070
80
90100110120130140
150160170T-20T-12T-4T+4T+12T+20euro areaFranceSpainGermanyItalyNetherlandsSources: BIS, ECB, national sources and ECB calculations.Notes: Grey area delimits interquartile range of developments in real household loans 
around troughs of real house prices for the sample considered (Q1 1970-Q4 2014). 67Overall, the downward adjustment of euro area real house prices after 2007 and 
 their recent recovery are in line with historical cyclical patterns. At the same time, this recovery seems to have been somewhat weaker than normal, which may be related to a relatively weaker credit cycle at the current juncture. The euro area 
house price and credit cycles also remain characterised by heterogeneity across countries. Such heterogeneity in the timing and strength of cyclical patterns may also reflect differences in structural features of housing and mortgage markets across 
countries (see Box 1). Box 1House price cycles and structural features of housing markets Differences in the cyclical development of house prices across countries may reflect differences in structural characteristics. Such characteristics, or changes therein, can dampen or amplify the impact on house prices of variations in housing supply and demand conditions over 
the business cycle. This box discusses selected structural features that are of importance for 
housing markets in the euro area.Empirical studies point to different categories of structural features that correlate with the variability of the house price cycle.5 The most prominent categories relate to parameters set by 
the fiscal and financial frameworks and to those that govern the responsiveness of housing supply 
to demand shocks. However, it is difficult to assess the precise impact of these parameters, as it 
typically depends on the combination of structural characteristics in place. Examples of structural characteristics in the fiscal framework mainly include housing-related 
taxes and subsidies. For instance, everything else being equal, higher transaction taxes for 
buying property should dampen housing market activity and thereby also the house price cycle, but 
may be doing so less in the case of higher tax deductibility of the interest on the mortgage liability 
that typically comes with a property purchase. In around half the euro area countries, mortgage 
interest payments are eligible for some degree of tax deductibility, and recurrent property taxes are 
levied in almost all euro area countries.6 Property transaction taxes are charged in most countries, 
although there are some exceptions, such as Estonia, Slovakia and Lithuania. Changes to the fiscal 

treatment of housing have occurred in a number of countries in the most recent period, including 
Spain, Ireland, Portugal, Finland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Italy, Greece and Portugal, all of 

which increased property tax rates or restricted the degree of mortgage interest tax deductibility.
Examples of mortgage market characteristics relate to the general conditions under which 
loans for house purchase are taken up and granted. For instance, higher loan-to-value and 
 loan-to-income ratios typically make house prices more sensitive to the business and credit cycles, 
 5 European Commission, ﬁHouse price imbalances and structural features of housing marketsﬂ, 
Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, Vol. 10, Issue 3, October 2011; and Tsatsaronis, K. and Zhu, H., ﬁWhat Drives Housing Price Dynamics: Cross-Country Evidenceﬂ, Quarterly Review, Bank for International Settlements, March 2004.6 ﬁTax Reforms in EU Member States 2014. Tax Policy Challenges for Economic Growth and Fiscal 

Sustainabilityﬂ, European Economy, European Commission, Vol. 6, 2014; and ﬁPossible Reforms of Real Estate Taxation: Criteria for Successful Policiesﬂ, European Economy, European Commission, Occasional Papers, No 119, October 2012.68as households are less constrained by credit and income when purchasing houses. Acknowledging 
the various measurement problems associated with a typical loan-to-value ratio, data collected before the crisis show that relatively high ratios used to be observed in the Netherlands and France, whereas they were on the lower side in Italy and Germany.
7 Also, the possibility of mortgage equity withdrawal may in general magnify the response of house prices to increased housing demand in a boom, as it tends to make housing investment even more attractive owing to its collateral services when house prices are anticipated to rise. However, in contrast to the United States, this possibility 
did not appear to be widespread in euro area countries in the past. Examples of the structural characteristics of housing supply responsiveness relate mainly to zoning regulations and building approval processes. For instance, housing supply may be relatively inelastic in regions where geographical conditions or local land use regulations inhibit the 
development of urban land into residential property. If so, a rise in housing demand leads, all things 
being equal, to a larger increase in house prices than in regions where this additional housing can be supplied relatively quickly with respect to the conversion process for land and the required permits.8 This type of structural characteristic may be more important for urban than for rural areas.
In conclusion, there are a number of structural characteristics that can affect the amplitude 
and timing of the house price cycle. These characteristics have remained sufficiently diverse 
across euro area countries to account for heterogeneities in house price cycles across countries, 
even in cases where countries would face broadly similar macroeconomic conditions. 4 The implications of house price developments for the 
macroeconomy and financial stabilityA recovery in house prices may have implications for both macroeconomic developments and financial stability.
9 This reflects the inherent interlinkages between house prices, the real economy and the financial sector, as well as the 
multiple channels through which developments in house prices can influence the economic decisions of households and banks. However, as the current recovery 
of house prices is taking place in a low interest rate environment, it is important to weigh the positive impact on the macroeconomy and the financial sector against the associated potential risks to financial stability.
7 ﬁHousing finance in the euro areaﬂ, 
Occasional Paper Series, ECB, No 101, March 2009.8 Saiz, A., ﬁThe Geographic Determinants of Housing Supplyﬂ. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
August 2010, pp. 1253-1296; Gyourko, J., ﬁHousing Supplyﬂ, Annual Review of Economics, September 2009, pp. 295-318; Andrews, D., ﬁReal House Prices in OECD Countries. The Role of Demand 
Shocks and Structural and Policy Factorsﬂ, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 
Economics Department Working Papers No 831; Catte, P., Girouard, N., Price, R. and André, C., ﬁThe Contribution of Housing Markets to Cyclical Resilienceﬂ, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, Economic Studies, Vol. 38, 2004/1; and Glaeser, E.., Gyourko, J. and Saiz, A., ﬁHousing Supply and Housing Bubblesﬂ, Journal of Urban Economics, September 2008, pp. 198-217.9 See, for example, ﬁStructural factors in the EU housing marketsﬂ, ECB, 2003; ﬁHousing Finance in the 

euro areaﬂ, Structural Issues Report, ECB, 2009; ﬁHouse price developments in the euro area and the 

United Statesﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, November 2011; and Hartmann, P., ﬁReal Estate Markets and 
Macro prudential Policy in Europeﬂ, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2015.69The impact of house prices on the macroeconomy is typically felt via wealth and collateral effects on consumption, as well as incentive effects on housing investment. In fact, housing wealth in the euro area represents, on average, 37% of households™ 

net worth. Thus, changes in house prices have a direct impact on households™ net worth through holding gains/
losses on existing non-financial assets, typically the most important source of changes in households™ 
net worth (see Chart 15). A prolonged period of 
rising house prices, or the expectation that there will be one, could be perceived by households as a permanent increase in wealth, which, in turn, could 
lead to stronger consumption via a propensity to save less or borrow more, and thereby to higher economic growth.10 Box 2 discusses the macroeconomic effects 
of a housing demand shock in the euro area and the United States. Beyond wealth effects, higher house 
prices increase the value of the collateral against which households can borrow, and thus increase not only 
their borrowing propensity, but also their borrowing capacity and, in turn, potentially 

their spending. From an investment perspective, rising house prices may lead to an increase in the demand for residential investment if the value of new dwellings 
increases relative to their construction costs (i.e. if the so-called Tobin™s q for housing 
investment increases), thereby leading to higher profitability and increased incentives 
for new constructions. In this context, house prices, like other asset prices, represent a potentially important component in monetary policy transmission, to the extent that changes in interest rates and other (non-standard) monetary policy measures affect 

house prices, thereby influencing private consumption and residential investment via the aforementioned channels.Box 2Macroeconomic effects of housing demand shocks 
This box compares the macroeconomic effects of house prices in the euro area with those in the United States11. The analysis is based on a vector autoregressive model (VAR) that includes 
macroeconomic variables such as real GDP, consumer prices and the short-term interest rate, with 

house prices and real housing investment representing the housing sector. In this framework, 
 10 The magnitude of the positive effect on consumption from higher house prices is an empirical matter. 
However, several findings in the literature point to greater effects on consumption from housing wealth 

than from financial wealth, and to a greater impact in the United States than in the euro area.11 Results are obtained with an updated version of the model presented in Jarocinski, M. and Smets,
 F., 
ﬁHouse prices and the stance of monetary policyﬂ, Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, July 2008, pp. 339-366. The data in this analysis are quarterly and the sample is from Q1 1990 to 
Q4 2014. Four lags are included, as is the typical practice with quarterly data. The estimation is 
Bayesian, with standard priors for VARs. The role of the priors is to improve the econometric properties 
of the model, given that its size is large relative to the sample size. The priors used follow Sims. C. and 
Zha, T., ﬁBayesian Methods for Dynamic Multivariate Modelsﬂ, International Economic Review, 1998. By shrinking the coefficients, they overcome the overparameterisation of the VAR. A ﬁlooseﬂ version of 
these priors is used.Chart 15Changes to household net worth in the euro area(year-on-year percentage changes and percentage point contributions)-6-4-20246
810contribution from net financial wealthcontribution from non-financial investment
contribution from revaluations and other changes in non-financial assetstotal wealth20072008200920102011201220132014Sources: ECB and ECB calculations. Note: Most recent observation is for Q1 2015.70a housing demand shock is identified by assuming that it causes a positive co-movement between house prices and housing investment on impact. In this analysis, a shock is simulated by assuming that it corresponds to the size of one standard deviation, i.e. the shock of the standard size encountered in the sample period (Q1 1990-Q4 2014).A housing demand shock raises real GDP 
growth in the euro area for about two years. After a housing demand shock, the 
impact on real GDP growth builds up to peak 
after four quarters at about 0.25 percentage point. The effect then diminishes and fades in 
approximately two years (see the chart).The results for the euro area are broadly consistent with other findings. Estimations for industrialised countries provide evidence of 
significant responses from house price shocks to real GDP.
12 Results for OECD countries13 show that, economically, housing demand shocks 
have small but significant impacts on real GDP. Empirical studies investigating the macroeconomic 
effects of house price shocks in the euro area are, however, rather scarce compared with the 
research focusing on specific countries, but tend to corroborate these findings, notwithstanding some differences in the magnitude and profile of the responses to the shocks.
The US economy responds to a housing demand shock in a similar way, but with a 
stronger magnitude14. The VAR results suggest that the responses to the shock estimated 
for the United States are somewhat stronger on impact and more prolonged compared with 
those in the euro area. One possible explanation for the difference between the euro area and 
the United States is the stronger housing collateral channel in the latter. Since housing is more 
common as a form of collateral for loans to households in the United States, borrowing has a tighter link to house prices. Therefore, changes in house prices should have a stronger impact 
on credit conditions and, consequently, consumption, investment and GDP growth.
12 Interestingly, the effects of house price shocks do not become stronger in periods of house price 
booms. See Goodhart, C. and Hoffman, B., ﬁHouse Prices, Money, Credit and the Macroeconomyﬂ, 
Working Paper Series, ECB, No 888, 2008. Their analysis is performed for 17 industrialised countries based on a fixed-effects panel VAR.13 See Cardarelli, R., Monacelli, T., Rebucci, A. and Sala, L., ﬁHousing finance, housing shocks and 

business cycle: VAR evidence from OECD countriesﬂ, unpublished manuscript, 2008.14 See Musso, A., Neri, S. and Stracca, L., ﬁHousing, Consumption and Monetary Policy: How different 

are the US and the Euro Area?ﬂ, Working Paper Series, ECB, No 1161, 2011.Chart Impulse response to a housing demand shock in the euro area and the United States(year-on-year percentage changes)-0.15-0.10
-0.050.000.050.10
0.15
0.200.250.30
0.3513579111315171921euro areaconfidence intervals (euro area)
United Statesx axis: quarters after shocky axis: percentage point impactSource: ECB simulations.71The wealth and collateral aspects of house price developments also have an important bearing on the health of the financial sector. 
This is reflected by the high importance of real estate-related lending relative to banks™ balance sheets and overall economic 
output. In fact, as at the end of 2014, real estate-related loans to households and non-financial firms in the euro area accounted for nearly 57% of euro area banks™ total 

loans to the non-financial private sector, some
 17% of the euro area banking sector™s total assets and
 53% of euro area GDP, with loans to households for house 
purchase representing the largest share (see Chart 16). Banks typically decide on the volume of loans granted 
on the basis of borrowers™ ability to service debts 
through income (i.e. loan-to-income ratios) and the value of the property used as collateral for the loan (i.e. loan-to-value ratios). Thus, the aforementioned positive 
wealth effects and underlying favourable changes in 
collateral values would translate into lower probabilities of default and losses given default. However, in the 

event of unsustainable property price developments, the financial sector may load risks onto its balance sheet, especially if house price developments not only have a bearing on the loan volume granted, but, more generally, also translate into laxer credit standards.
Positive effects of rising house prices on economic growth and the banking sector should thus be assessed against the related potential risks for financial stability. 
In the current low interest rate 
environment, greater appetite for risk may have the potential to push up real estate prices to values that are not justified by their fundamental values, a development that could be amplified by herding behaviour by investors in an environment of over-optimistic beliefs. 
In fact, residential property markets have been at the heart of many previous episodes of financial distress once buoyant house price developments started to be accompanied by strong credit growth and leverage. However, there are currently few signs of the ongoing 
recovery in residential property markets translating into either widespread house price imbalances or rapid 
housing loan growth at the level of the euro area as a whole or the respective national levels (see Chart 17), especially when compared 
with the situation prior to the crisis when most euro area countries recorded double-digit household loan growth. Any observed decoupling of loan growth from house 
prices in the current housing market recovery phase may reflect specific factors, Chart 16Real estate-related loans of euro area MFIs(percentage of GDP and percentage of total loans to households and non-financial 
corporations)4546
47
48
495051525354
555657051015
202530
35
404550
55
60200320042005200620072008200920102011201220132014loans to non-financial firms for construction (left-hand scale)
loans to non-financial firms for real estate activities (left-hand scale)

loans to households for house purchase (left-hand scale)
total real estate-related lending to households and 
non-financial firms (right-hand scale)
Source: ECB.
Note: Most recent observation is for Q4 2014.Chart 17House prices and loans to households in 2014(year-on-year percentage changes, x-axis: loans to households, y-axis: house prices)BEDEIEGRESFRITCYLUMTNLATPTSISKFILVEELTEA-15-10-50
510
15-10-5051015Sources: ECB and ECB calculations.Notes: Bank lending data are adjusted for securitisation. Countries most affected by the 

depicted with a yellow dot.72such as the presence of foreign buyers in certain (mainly high-priced) market segments, especially in some large cities, or the purchase of housing with cash. In this context, countries with stronger growth in average house prices in the past few years, such as Germany and Austria, show signs of regional buoyancy, where house 
prices may exceed their longer-term fundamental value.15Macroprudential policies seem to be the most appropriate to mitigate real estate-related risks to financial stability, enabling granular and targeted 
policy action to be taken. The current very accommodative monetary conditions 
may not only stimulate economic risk-taking Œ necessary to ensure attainment of the price stability objective Œ but also lead to unintended side effects in the form 

of encouraging financial risk-taking.16 Against this background, there is a need to 
monitor risk-taking behaviour and, specifically, residential real estate price growth, 

particularly if they are accompanied by increased leverage, as such developments could amplify the risk of an abrupt residential property price correction. If these were to be widespread, they would lead to instability in the financial system, thereby hampering monetary policy transmission and, ultimately, price stability. 
Macroprudential policy, comprising a set of granular measures, provides the most 
appropriate instruments for mitigating risks to financial stability and containing 
systemic risks in order to support and complement monetary policy, which is geared 
towards fulfilling the ECB™s price stability mandate.
Several euro area countries have implemented macroprudential real estate instruments since the beginning of 2014, or plan to do so. In fact, the new macroprudential toolkit offers national authorities numerous property-related 

instruments. In terms of their objectives, these instruments may help to alleviate future cyclical challenges by smoothing the credit cycle and to increase the 
resilience of banks to potential house price excesses. Instruments targeting banks work via regulatory capital requirements, either directly (by imposing higher capital requirements) or indirectly (by targeting variables which affect capital 
requirements for real estate exposures). In this context, Belgium, for example, has decided to adjust risk weights under the Capital Requirements Regulation and 
Capital Requirements Directive IV, which has been in force since
 1 January 2014. Instruments targeting borrowers work directly on the terms and conditions of the loans by making the volume of the loan granted dependent on the value of the underlying property or the debt-servicing capacity of the borrower.
17 Some countries have opted to introduce or adjust loan-to-value caps (e.g. Estonia, Ireland and the Netherlands), as well as loan-to-income (e.g. Ireland) or debt service-to-income (e.g. Estonia and Lithuania) limits under national legislation.15 See the February 2015 issue of the Deutsche Bundesbank™s Monthly Report and Schneider, M., 
Wagner, K., and Waschiczek, W., 
The OeNB property market monitor, April 2015. These studies 
suggest that prices in German cities in 2014 could have been overvalued by between 10% and 20%, 

and prices in Vienna at the end of 2014 by 19%. 16 For a more detailed discussion, see the box entitled ﬁAccommodative monetary policy and euro area 

financial stabilityﬂ, Financial Stability Review, May 2015.17 For a more detailed description of macroprudential real estate instruments, see the ESRB Handbook on 

Operationalising Macro-Prudential Policy in the Banking sector, March 2014, pp. 49-76.735 Conclusions
The ongoing upturn in euro area house prices appears to be sustainable. 
However, it seems that the current recovery is weaker than the typical increase 
observed historically during the initial phase of an upturn in house prices after a 
trough, and that it has not so far been accompanied by a significant increase in euro 
area real household loans. The ongoing recovery in house prices should be further 
supported by improving prospects for households™ income and employment, as well 
as favourable financing conditions. The prevailing low interest rate environment and 
its implications on yields will play an important role in this.Substantial corrections in earlier house price imbalances have taken place in several euro area countries. Since 2007, when the downturn for euro area house 
prices started, the large heterogeneity in house price dynamics reflected, among other things, country-specific boom-bust cycles, demand and supply conditions, and structural factors. Housing markets in countries which have already corrected previous excesses in house price growth are likely to benefit more from the current favourable environment in terms of low interest rates and improving macroeconomic 
conditions, and vice versa. Risks to financial stability appear to be limited at the current juncture, not 
least as the ongoing recovery in house prices has not translated into rapid 
credit growth so far.
 The new macroprudential toolkit has allowed several 
countries to take steps to rein in any potential house price and credit exuberance, 
with the numerous property-related instruments boding well for the alleviation of any 
future cyclical challenges, while also helping to increase the resilience of banks and 
their borrowers.74The fiscal impact of financial sector support during the crisis During the financial crisis, most euro area governments provided financial assistance 
to ailing financial institutions with the aim of safeguarding financial stability and 
preventing a credit crunch. Over the period 2008-14 accumulated gross financial 
sector assistance amounted to 8% of euro area GDP, of which 3.3% has been 
recovered. The fiscal costs of the assistance to financial institutions are comparable 
to those of other systemic banking crises in the past, as they led to a deterioration 
in the euro area budget balance and debt by a cumulated 1.8% and 4.8% of GDP 
respectively.
 However, on average the measures account for a relatively small part 
of the overall strong increase in general government debt since the outbreak of the 
crisis. At the same time, outstanding government guarantees (amounting to 2.7% of 
euro area GDP at the end of 2014) and further potential losses of asset management 
vehicles to which impaired assets had been transferred still pose additional fiscal risks 
to governments. Looking ahead, it is important both to reduce the likelihood of financial 

institutions facing severe balance sheet problems by enhancing bank capital, banking 
regulation and supervision, and to promote bank resolution policies that include private 
sector involvement, thereby protecting taxpayers. In this sense, the recent steps 
towards a genuine European banking union are encouraging and should not only help 
to prevent and/or resolve future banking crises in the euro area, but also to reduce 
their potential fiscal impact on government deficits and debt. 
1 IntroductionSince the outbreak of the financial crisis, most euro area governments have provided substantial financial assistance to financial institutions with the aim of safeguarding financial stability and preventing a credit crunch. These measures contributed to the increase in euro area general government debt, which 
rose by 27 percentage points between 2008 and the end of 2014, when it stood at 92% of GDP. The direct net fiscal costs of financial sector assistance (less than 5% 
of GDP) were only one factor explaining the overall sharp rise in government debt in the euro area. Yet they played a much more important role in a number of euro area 

countries. A preliminary assessment of the fiscal impact of financial sector support 
was provided at an early stage of the financial crisis.1 Given that further support has been provided since then and in view of the gradual recovery of the euro area 
financial sector and the recent reforms supporting the prevention of banking crises, it is now a good time to reassess the fiscal costs of financial sector support. 1 See for example ﬁThe impact of government support to the banking sector on euro area public 
financesﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, July 2009; van Riet, A. (ed.), ﬁEuro area fiscal policies and the crisisﬂ, Occasional Paper Series, No 109, ECB, 2010; and Stolz, S. and Wedow, M., ﬁExtraordinary measures in extraordinary times: public measures in support of the financial sector in the EU and the United 
Statesﬂ, Occasional Paper Series, No 117, ECB, 2010. 75This article addresses the following questions: First, which financial assistance measures have been used? Second, how costly were the financial sector assistance measures for taxpayers, how much of the costs have been recovered to date and how much have the measures contributed to the sharp increase in government debt? Third, what are the remaining fiscal risks related to financial sector support? 
In addressing these questions, the article provides a detailed overview of the government measures to assist financial institutions since the beginning of the crisis.2 Compared with other systemic banking crises in advanced economies, the direct fiscal costs of financial assistance measures in the euro area are of a similar magnitude, while the overall increase in general government debt is considerably larger. However, the estimated fiscal costs of government intervention in the banking 
sector vary substantially across studies depending on the methodology used for their derivation and the definition of fiscal costs. This article mainly follows the bottom-up 
approach which sums up all of the government measures related to the financial crisis, although some of these measures may be difficult to quantify, especially if they 

were carried out by entities classified outside the general government sector.
3 The article focuses on government measures to support the financial sector and does not look at the central bank liquidity measures adopted during the financial crisis.4 The article is structured as follows: Section 2 looks at the support measures used by euro area governments over the period 2008-14, with a particular focus on asset acquisitions and capital transfers. Section 3 assesses their fiscal impact on budget balances and general government debt and discusses the recovery rates on acquired assets. Section 4 outlines the remaining fiscal risks related to government guarantees and asset management vehicles. The article ends with some policy 
conclusions in Section 5. 2 Financial sector assistance measures 
Most euro area governments have supported the financial sector with a set 

of measures, notwithstanding considerable differences across countries and 
changes over time. For example, governments supported financial institutions by 
purchasing their illiquid financial assets and by providing them with direct loans. 
The acquired assets included equities, debt securities and other assets, which 
2 The analysis is based on data compiled by the Working Group on Government Finance Statistics of 
the European System of Central Banks (ESCB).The statistical framework is described in more detail in 
Maurer, H. and Grussenmeyer, P., ﬁFinancial assistance measures in the euro area from 2008 to 2013: 
statistical framework and fiscal impactﬂ, Statistics Working Paper Series, No 7, ECB, 2015. 3 In the literature, there are two main approaches to estimating the fiscal costs of financial sector 

support (see also ECB, 2009, op. cit.). First, the bottom-up approach sums up all of the government 
interventions; see for example Laeven, L. and Valencia, F., ﬁSystemic banking crises database: 
an updateﬂ, Working Paper Series, No 163, IMF, 2012. Second, the top-down approach assumes that changes in the government debt-to-GDP ratio since the crisis are related to the financial crisis, 
although this approach also includes debt changes which are unrelated to financial sector support. 
This approach is followed inter alia by Reinhart, C. and Rogoff, K., ﬁRecovery from Financial Crises: 
Evidence from 100 Episodesﬂ, American Economic Review, Vol. 104(5), 2014, pp. 50-55.4 Central bank liquidity measures are discussed, for example, in ﬁThe ECB™s non-standard measures Œ 

impact and phasing-outﬂ, 
Monthly Bulletin
, ECB, July 2011; ﬁThe ECB™s response to the financial crisisﬂ, 

Monthly Bulletin, ECB, October 2010; and ﬁThe implementation of monetary policy since August 2007ﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, July 2009.76governments exchanged against cash or other collateral at their market value. 
Sometimes governments had to inject capital into ailing financial institutions by 
acquiring assets well above their market value. These recapitalisations aimed to 
cover the banks™ accumulated losses and eventually resulted in government losses. 
Some governments were also forced to nationalise (systemic) banks. Moreover, some 
of the impaired assets were acquired by newly created asset management vehicles. 
In exchange for the transferred assets, financial institutions were provided with cash 
and/or bonds issued by the vehicles usually enjoying a state guarantee. Governments 

also provided explicit guarantees to financial institutions, such as time-restricted 
guarantees for interbank loans or bonds, and raised the coverage threshold for 
guaranteed bank deposits. Furthermore, the higher government debt resulting from 
most of these interventions led to indirect fiscal costs in the form of additional interest 
payments. At the same time, government interventions also implied indirect revenues 

in the form of fees for guarantees granted, dividends on acquired equity and interest 
receipts on the loans provided and debt securities bought.Among the measures mentioned above, the 
acquisition of financial assets was used by euro area governments in particular in the early years of the financial crisis. Between 2008 and 2014 governments acquired financial assets in an amount of 
5.3% of euro area GDP in gross terms (see Chart
 1), two-thirds of which were purchased in the first three 
years of the crisis. When taking into account the fact that part of the assets has in the meantime been divested without losses, the net acquired assets amounted to 2.9% of GDP in 2014. Among the acquired 
assets, debt securities and equities together accounted for the bulk (around 90%) of the acquired assets, while new loans were used to a much lower degree 
over the period 2008-14. The net acquisition of financial 
assets was particularly pronounced in Germany, 
Ireland, Greece, Cyprus, Luxembourg, Portugal and Slovenia, with acquisitions being well above 5% of GDP 
(see column (A) of Table 2). 
Moreover, euro area governments supported distressed financial institutions 

via capital transfers. Besides financial assets purchased at above-market prices, 
capital transfers reflected called government guarantees and other types of debt assumption. Capital transfers amounted to 2.1% of GDP over the period 2008-14. 
These deficit-increasing capital transfers played a role in particular in Ireland (above 25% of GDP), Greece, Cyprus and Slovenia, while in other countries their extent was more limited (see column (C) of Table 2). 
Chart 1Assets acquired over the period 2008-14(percentages of 2014 GDP)012345
6net acquired assetssales/repayments of aquired assetsAcquired financialassets (total)EquityinstrumentsProvision ofnew loansDebt securities and other assetsSource: ESCB.Note: The sum of the net acquired assets (blue) and the sales/repayments (yellow) 

corresponds to the gross amount of the respective acquired assets.773 Fiscal impact of financial assistance measures 
General government debt in the euro area increased from 65% of GDP in 
early 2008 to 92% of GDP at the end of 2014.
 Only a relatively small part of this rise in government debt, which was particularly pronounced in the first years of the 
financial crisis, was driven by the support provided by euro area governments to ailing financial institutions in order to secure financial stability, although for some 
individual countries the impact on government debt 
was substantial. To better understand how government 
finances were affected by the financial crisis in 

general and by financial sector support interventions in particular, it is useful to decompose the government 
debt increase into its main driving factors (see Chart 2). First, the debt-increasing impact of a positive interest rate-growth differential, which captures the difference between the interest rate paid to 
service government debt and the growth rate of the 
economy, was particularly strong in the early years of 
the crisis, following the cyclical downturn in the euro area triggered by the financial crisis. More recently, 
as a consequence of low interest rates and a cyclical recovery, its relative importance has started to decline. 
Second, the rise in government debt was also driven by a sharp deterioration of the primary balance. This was inter alia the result of higher primary 
expenditure, reflecting the role of automatic stabilisers, 
such as higher unemployment benefits, as well as discretionary fiscal policy measures. The latter also 
include part of the financial sector assistance measures, in particular the costs 
of capital transfers to cover accumulated losses of ailing banks. Moreover, lower 
government revenues following the cyclical downturn and the rebalancing process also contributed to the worsening of the primary balance via so-called second-round effects, as the decline in employment, corporate profits and asset values, triggered 

by the financial crisis, resulted in lower revenues. Third, the debt increase was driven by deficit-debt adjustments. These had several causes. Among them are those financial sector support measures that did 
not affect the primary balance, but did affect general government debt, such as 
governments™ acquisition of equities at market prices or the provision of government 
loans to the financial sector. As the governments acquired assets, these measures 
resulted in an increase in gross debt, while net debt remained largely unaffected. 

Deficit-debt adjustments were particularly pronounced until 2010 for the euro area as a whole. Chart 2Change in government gross debt and its drivers(percentages of GDP)1086
4
2
0-2
-420072008200920102011201220132014primary balance (-)interest rate-growth differential
deficit-debt adjustmentchange in government debtSources: Eurostat and ECB.


to debt: bridging the gapﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, April 2007.
78To quantify the impact of the financial sector assistance measures on the 
government accounts, it is necessary to look at the individual transactions and the financing requirements resulting from them. Depending on the nature and the magnitude of the assistance measures, government finances are affected 

differently (see Table 1).
While all instruments, except for outstanding government guarantees, increase government debt, most of them do not affect the budget balance (see Table 1). In 
particular, net acquisitions of financial assets by governments, including equities, 
loans and debt securities at market prices, are debt-increasing.Acquisitions of financial assets usually only affect gross government debt, while 

net government debt remains broadly unchanged. By contrast, all financial sector support measures that include an irreversible 
annual expenditure for the government are recorded in the cumulated budget 
balance (see Table 1 and column (B) of Table 2). They include capital transfers, 
such as the debt of banks taken over by the government, called government guarantees, financial assets purchased at above-market prices and 
 deficit-increasing capital injections into banks to cover past losses. In addition, the general government budget balance is also affected by revenues that are 
linked to financial support transactions, such as fees received by governments for granting guarantees, dividends from acquired equities as well as interest received on financial instruments acquired. The sum of the net acquisition of 
Table 1
Accounting framework for general government assistance to the financial sector ExamplesImpact on generalgovernment debtImpact on fiscal balanceDirect impact of interventions
Acquisition of equities (market price)0Acquisition of other assets, e.g. debt securities0Provision of loans0Sales of shares0Repayments of loans0Capital transfers to banks
priceCapital injections covering bank losses Debt assumptionsCalled government guaranteesIndirect impact of interventionsMiscellaneous revenues and expendituresGuarantee feesDividendsInterest payable/ receivable

sector to general governmentLiabilities of entities (i.e. the non-consolidated 
liabilities)0Assets of entities (i.e. only the consolidated 
assets)0Provision of guaranteesGovernment guaranteesGuarantees on liabilities (contingent liabilities)00Guarantees on assets00Source: ESCB.79financial assets and the cumulated impact on the budget balance represents the government™s net fiscal costs of the financial assistance measure (see Table 2). 
The reclassification of entities from the financial sector to the general 
government sector (notably in the case of bank nationalisations) increases government debt. The provision of government guarantees has no direct impact on public finances, 
unless the guarantees are called. Financial assistance measures led to a worsening of the euro area budget 
balance by a cumulated 1.8% of GDP between 2008 and 2014.
 How their impact on government accounts is treated in the Stability and Growth Pact is described in the box later in this article. The impact on the budget balance differed considerably 
across countries. The deficit impact was particularly strong in Ireland, where it led to 
a cumulated worsening of the budget balance of almost 25% of GDP (see Table
 2). The budget balances of Greece, Cyprus and Slovenia were also substantially 
affected by the support measures, with a cumulated deficit impact of between 8% 
and 13% of GDP during 2008-14. In most other countries, the cumulated deficit 
impact was more limited, ranging from 0.4% of GDP in Belgium to 4.4% of GDP in 
Spain. For France, Italy and Luxembourg, the cumulated revenues from financial assistance measures even slightly exceeded the expenditures. Table 2
Fiscal impact of financial sector support over the period 2008-14(percentages of 2014 GDP)Net fiscal costsEDP debt impactMemo item: Change 
in government debtTotal(A)+(B)Net acquisitions of financial assets (A)Cumulated impact on budget balance (deficit (+), surplus (-))(end of 2014)(D)(2008-14)total(B)due to capital transfers(C)BE3.73.30.41.14.619.7DE8.06.71.31.88.211.0
IE31.17.024.125.722.685.7GR22.19.612.514.922.273.7ES5.00.64.44.85.062.2FR0.00.1-0.10.10.131.1IT-0.10.0-0.10.00.132.4CY18.810.38.59.119.453.4LV5.21.93.33.35.531.6LT1.30.21.10.90.925.0LU5.55.6-0.10.15.316.0NL4.84.10.70.75.526.1AT3.50.43.13.68.419.7PT11.3
8.42.92.611.0
61.7Sl18.16.112.011.5
18.258.2EA4.72.91.82.14.827.0Sources: ESCB and Eurostat.









transactions not recorded in EDP debt. 
80General government debt in the euro area increased by 4.8% of GDP over the 
period from 2008 to 2014 owing to financial sector assistance. The impact on 
government debt resulted from the sum of the net fiscal costs of financial sector 
support (4.7% of GDP) and the impact of reclassifications and other flows (0.1% of GDP).5 The debt increase as a result of financial sector support corresponds to less 
than one-fifth of the increase in government debt over the same period (see Table
 2). 
The debt impact of financial sector support varied considerably across countries. Financial sector support led to a substantial increase in government debt of around 20% of GDP in Ireland, Greece, Cyprus and Slovenia. It also had a high impact 
in Germany, especially owing to measures taken at the onset of the crisis, and in 
Austria and Portugal, mainly as a result of more recent interventions. By contrast, government debt in Italy and France was hardly affected by financial sector support.
Compared with past financial crises in advanced economies, the deterioration in euro area government finances was worse, despite a similar amount of 
financial sector assistance. According to a recent study from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which measured the fiscal costs of 60 systemic banking crises between 1970 and 2011, the median increase in overall government debt 
was around 12% of GDP, of which 7 percentage points were accounted for by the 
direct fiscal costs of financial sector support.6 Regarding the recent crisis (2007-11), 
the IMF analysis looks at a sample of 25 systemic banking crises, mainly involving advanced economies. The median increase in government debt was 18% of GDP, 
of which 4.2 percentage points were due to direct fiscal costs, compared with an increase in government debt for the euro area of almost 22% of GDP, of which only 
4.6 percentage points were explained by direct financial sector support. These 
differences suggest that the indirect macroeconomic costs of the financial crisis in 
the euro area have been even more pronounced compared with previous systemic 
banking crises. The recovery rates, which represent the share of acquired assets which 
governments were able to successfully dispose of, are improving, but are 
still relatively low by historical standards. Recovery rates are derived from the 
difference between the acquired financial assets in gross terms and the assets in 
net terms. Up to now, eight years after the crisis started, only a small fraction of the 
fiscal costs of the euro area has been recovered (see Chart 3). Out of 8% of GDP 

of accumulated gross financial sector assistance measures,7 which corresponds to 
•800 billion, 3.3% of GDP has been recovered through sales of acquired assets and 
other miscellaneous revenues derived from the assets acquired and the guarantees 
granted (e.g. dividends, fees, interest receipts). This corresponds to a recovery rate 
5 While the difference is usually very small, there are some exceptions. For example, in Ireland, some 
financial assistance measures have been financed through the disposal of assets held by government 
pension funds.6 See ﬁFrom Banking to Sovereign Stress Œ Implications for Public Debtﬂ, IMF, 2015, which analyses how 

certain country and banking sector characteristics impact the fiscal costs of banking crises.7 To get an idea of governments™ financial exposure arising from financial sector support, the net fiscal 

costs have to be supplemented by the amount of outstanding government guarantees and include 
the indirect revenues. In the literature, however, it is sometimes argued that gross fiscal costs (which 
encompass recovered assets) are a better metric to reflect the taxpayers™ money spent at the time of 
the support. This indicator could also serve as a basis for determining the financial buffers needed 
for government assistance in the context of possible future crises (see for example Laeven, L. and 
Valencia, F., op.cit.).81of slightly more than 40% of gross fiscal costs, which is relatively low by international 
comparison. For example, Sweden was able to recover almost 95% of its budgetary 
outlays five years after the crisis in 1991.8 The recovery rates to date are particularly 
low in Ireland, Cyprus and Portugal, while they are relatively high in the Netherlands.9The recovery rates, however, differ for different types of acquired assets. 
Looking at the different instruments, most (92%) of the loans provided to banks had 
been paid back by the end of 2014 (see Chart 1). By contrast, governments still hold a large share of the acquired debt securities and equities, although they were able to sell 43% of the debt securities and 34% of the equities by end-2014. Consequently, 
the accumulated net acquisition of both debt securities and equities amounted to 1.4% of GDP by the end of 2014. 
At the same time, the recovery rates also need to be carefully analysed, together 
with the accumulated losses related to the assistance measures. In fact, a low 
recovery rate might be due to very different scenarios and does not necessarily 

indicate high accumulated losses. For example, a limited recovery rate could indicate, 
in the best case, that a government retains ownership of a well-performing bank which 
would generate substantial gains in the event of a subsequent privatisation. In the 
worst case, a limited recovery rate could indicate that the interventions led to major 
irreversible losses, as in the case of Cyprus, with a holding loss for the government on 

equity instruments amounting to 10.5% of GDP owing to the restructuring of one of its 
largest banks. For the period 2008-14 the accumulated losses on average for the euro 
area amounted to 1.8% of GDP, thus indicating that almost 25% of the gross fiscal 
needs are currently accounted for as a loss which cannot be recovered. 
8 See also Table 1 in ECB, July 2009, op. cit.
9 With regard to Greece, the substantial difference between gross and net fiscal costs is mainly 
explained by the following facts. Until 2012 the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund provided loans to the 
Greek banking system. These loans were subsequently used to bridge the time until recapitalisations 
in the form of equity acquisitions could take place (2013). Although this basically represents a shift in 
instruments, the gross fiscal costs include both loans and recapitalisations, while the net fiscal costs 
are adjusted for the loans cancelled after recapitalisations.Chart 3Fiscal costs and recovery rates over the period 2008-14(percentages of 2014 GDP)45403530
25
2015105
0-5BEDEIEGRESFRITCYLVLTLUNLATPTSIEAfiscal costs (gross)fiscal costs (net)Sources: ESCB and Eurostat.

82Box Treatment of financial sector support in the Stability and Growth Pact 
In the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), financial sector support is treated in a special manner 
given its importance for safeguarding financial stability.
 At times of severe banking problems, 
Member States are generally not required to compensate for the fiscal costs arising from financial 
sector support, provided the measures are of a temporary nature.10 Given that the fiscal costs to 
secure financial stability are largely beyond the control of governments, this seems broadly justified. 
In fact, it is important that the SGP does not provide disincentives to effective public backstops. A 
similar approach has also been taken in the EU-IMF adjustment programmes, in which nominal fiscal 
targets are set explicitly by excluding the impact of financial sector support on the deficit. 
Under the preventive arm of the SGP, capital injections are excluded from the calculation 
of the structural effort, provided they are temporary.
 The structural effort is the main indicator 
under the preventive arm to assess whether the adjustment path towards the medium-term objective (MTO) is fulfilled. The structural effort is calculated based on the change in the structural 
balance, which excludes temporary and one-off measures such as capital injections. 
Under the corrective arm of the SGP, an excessive deficit procedure (EDP) may not be 
opened in the case of financial sector support. If a Member State were to be temporarily in breach of the deficit criterion as a result of financial sector support, but the deficit would remain close to 3% of GDP (i.e. not more than 0.5% of GDP above the reference rate), opening an EDP 
can be avoided. Likewise for the debt, when non-compliance with the debt reduction benchmark results from financial sector support, a debt-based EDP will not be opened. In both cases, financial 
sector support measures (including contingent liabilities) are accounted for as relevant factors, as 
under the debt-based EDP assessments for Belgium and Italy published in February 2015. 
In addition, financial sector support would not lead to the stepping-up of an existing EDP.
 Compliance with the EDP requirements is assessed based on the structural effort, which excludes 
temporary and one-off measures. Thus, Member States providing financial sector support are not 

forced to make additional fiscal consolidation efforts, provided that the necessary structural efforts 
are made. For example, in the context of the 2013 extension of the EDP deadline for Slovenia, 
the Council recommendation also referred to deficit targets, netting out the expected fiscal costs of financial sector support. Moreover, if a country is not able to correct its excessive deficit by 
the agreed deadline as a result of financial sector support, the procedure will not be stepped up. Instead, the abrogation of the procedure would be delayed for some time (usually one year). However, when deciding on the abrogation of an EDP, the decision is based on the nominal 
(headline) deficit, which is not adjusted for financial sector support.10 See the box entitled ﬁThe fiscal implications of financial sector supportﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, June 2013.834 Fiscal risks related to government interventions 
in financial institutions In addition to the above-mentioned fiscal costs, financial sector support can entail significant broader fiscal risks. If one were to include the amount of explicit contingent liabilities related to government guarantees granted to financial 
institutions, which have no immediate direct impact on government finances but pose a potential fiscal risk should they be called, the government™s exposure would be 
much higher.
11 Moreover, governments also provided implicit guarantees to financial 
institutions, partly motivated by the too-big-to-fail argument and in order to avoid spillover effects. However, these implicit guarantees are difficult to quantify and are 
therefore not discussed further in this article. At the outbreak of the financial crisis, many euro area governments provided explicit guarantees to financial institutions to support financial stability.
 Most explicit government guarantees were granted to ailing financial institutions for different kinds of liabilities and assets, such as issued bonds, interbank deposits, 
senior unsecured debt, asset-backed securities and dated subordinated debt. Furthermore, in a few cases, for example in Ireland, Spain and France, government 
guarantees were also granted for the financing of asset management vehicles (on average these amounted to about 20% of outstanding government guarantees at the end of 2014). Explicit guarantees were mainly granted 
in the early years of the crisis. The level 
 of government guarantees granted, expressed in terms 
of GDP, exceeded the net fiscal costs of financial 
sector support until 2012 (see Chart 4). Government guarantees in the euro area peaked at almost 8% of GDP in 2009 (excluding government guarantees 
on retail deposits) and declined to 2.7% of GDP by the 
end of 2014.Since 2012 the amount of outstanding government guarantees has declined strongly.
 This can be 
explained by three factors. First, a large share of 
guarantees has expired since then and, because financial stability has been re-established, it was not necessary to prolong them. There were no or only 
limited new guarantees granted to financial institutions in 2014. Second, in a few cases guarantees were called and the amounts were then recorded as general government debt. Third, some financial entities to 

which governments granted guarantees were recently reclassified inside the general government. This implied 
that the liabilities of the reclassified entities became part 11 The immediate direct impact of state guarantees on government finances relates to the collection of 
fees that financial institutions usually have to pay in exchange for the state guarantee, which results in 
government revenues. However, the collected fees have been rather limited for most countries. For the 
euro area, they amounted to an annual average of less than 0.05% of GDP during 2008-14.Chart 4Financial exposure of governments arising from interventions in financial institutions(percentages of GDP)02
4
6
810
122008200920102011201220132014net fiscal costsgovernment guaranteesSource: ESCB.







Government guarantees do not include deposit insurance schemes.84of general government debt, while the amount of government guarantees to these entities declined accordingly. 
While most euro area countries provided explicit government guarantees, their outstanding amount varied across countries. By far the highest level of government guarantees in terms of GDP was observed in Ireland, which peaked at 

190% of GDP in 2008, but substantially declined thereafter to around 13% of GDP 
by the end of 2014 (see Table 3). Government guarantees at end-2014 were still 
sizeable in Greece and to a lower degree in Belgium, while they had been almost fully phased out in the Netherlands and Austria. For the latter, the decrease in 
guarantees is explained by the fact that one financial institution is now classified 
inside the general government, which implies that the respective government guarantees are no longer recorded, whereas gross government debt has increased by the amount of the outstanding liabilities of this entity.
Several countries have experienced losses on government guarantees that were called. While for the euro area as a whole, the share of called guarantees seems to be rather limited, amounting to roughly 0.3% of total outstanding 
guarantees (less than 0.01% of GDP) in 2014, this figure might be somewhat misleading. In particular in cases of major restructuring of financial institutions, to which government guarantees were granted, the outstanding government guarantees decreased through the purchase of impaired assets previously guaranteed. In this respect, estimates of default probabilities can help form a view of the risk of government guarantees being called.12 12 See ﬁFiscal implications of the global economic and financial crisisﬂ, 
Occasional Paper Series, No 269, IMF, 2009. Based on the estimation of the expected default frequency-implied credit default swap spreads, using November 2008 market data, outlays from state guarantees were estimated to be in the 
order of 1-3% of GDP in cumulative terms for 2009-13 for advanced economies.Table 3
Outstanding government guarantees Peak amountEnd of 2014Percentage of GDPYearBE15.4(2009)9.3DE5.5(2009)0.8IE190.0(2008)12.9GR37.9(2011)
28.5ES9.9(2012)5.2FR4.7(2009)2.2IT5.3(2012)1.4CY16.9(2010)5.7LV2.8(2009)0.2LU4.8(2013)4.6NL12.1(2009)0.0AT5.0(2009)0.0PT9.5(2012)3.6Sl5.9(2010)0.3EA7.6(2009)2.7Sources: ESCB and Eurostat.Notes: Estonia, Lithuania, Malta, Slovakia and Finland are not included in the table as they did not provide government guarantees to 
for emergency liquidity assistance. The latter do not fall within the scope of the statistics on government guarantees
85In addition, many countries lifted the coverage threshold of their deposit insurance schemes. At the beginning of the crisis, the coverage of the national 
schemes was increased to a minimum level of •50,000 per depositor per bank. This 
threshold was then further raised to •100,000 as part of the revisions to the EU Directive on deposit guarantee schemes, which also led to the banks Œ rather than governments Œ having to cover the insurance. In contrast to the explicit guarantees provided for financial institutions™ assets, the deposit guarantee schemes are 
not time-restricted. Thus, they do not phase out unless it is decided to lower the 

threshold covered by the insurance. If claims were to be made, they would in the first instance be covered by the insurance, so the impact on budget balances would likely be limited.Moreover, government guarantees might imply higher fiscal costs in the long 
run as they could, like other financial sector interventions, create adverse incentives for financial institutions. In fact, those institutions benefiting from government guarantees and other interventions might be inclined to take more risks or postpone a speedy repair of their balance sheets (see IMF, 2015, op. cit.). 
Moreover, government guarantees might not be fully credible, in particular if they 
are sizeable while the country™s fiscal space is limited, in which case governments 
would be unable to pay if the guarantees were to be called.13 Credibility concerns, however, would make the resolution potentially more costly, as they would increase 

the likelihood of guarantees being called and the need for further measures in support of the financial sector. Thus, although government guarantees have almost 
no immediate direct impact on government finances, they might in the end result in higher direct fiscal costs.Fiscal risks also relate to the newly created asset management vehicles for which fiscal costs could turn out higher than expected. More than half of the euro area countries created such vehicles in order to relieve the balance sheets 
of financial institutions by transferring impaired assets to these new entities at a 
reduced book value. Generally, asset management vehicles can be seen as an 
effective means for dealing with non-performing loans.
14 However, the potential fiscal 
risks related to asset management vehicles vary considerably across countries, 
depending on their specific characteristics in terms of government ownership, governments™ responsibilities in case of losses and the underlying financing strategy 
of the entities.15 In particular when asset management vehicles are classified within the general government sector, all their liabilities are part of general government 

debt, as for example in the case of the BAMC in Slovenia (see Table 4). The future 
impact on the budgetary balance depends on how future revenues and expenditures evolve. If, however, the asset management vehicles are classified within the financial 
13 Partly as a result of substantial government guarantees, rating agencies have downgraded a number 
of euro area countries, which led to an increase in their financing costs (see Stolz and Wedow, 2010, 
op. cit.). 14 See ﬁResolving the legacy of non-performing exposures in euro area banksﬂ, 
Financial Stability Review
, ECB, May 2015.15 Privately owned asset management vehicles usually impose larger haircuts on the acquired assets 

than publicly owned entities, which affects the profitability of the entities and the subsequent fiscal 
risks. The haircut applied to transferred assets has varied from 0% to more than 50%. See Gandrud, C. 
and Hallerberg, M., ﬁBad banks in the EU: the impact of Eurostat rulesﬂ, Working Paper Series, No 15, Bruegel, 2014.86sector, the direct fiscal impact is likely to be more limited and mainly related to the 
risk that future dividends will not cover future losses, in which case the outstanding government guarantees would need to be called. In addition, ownership may be shared, as is the case with the asset management vehicles of Ireland (NAMA) and Spain (SAREB). Moreover, as demonstrated by NAMA and BAMC in 2014, asset 
management vehicles can also generate profits. 5 Conclusions
During the financial crisis, most euro area governments provided financial 
assistance to financial institutions with the aim of safeguarding financial stability and preventing a credit crunch. Accumulated gross financial sector assistance measures amounted to 8% of euro area GDP, of which only 3.3% has 

been recovered. The fiscal costs of the financial assistance measures over the 
period 2008-14 caused the euro area budget balance and debt to worsen by a cumulated 1.8% and 4.8% of GDP respectively
. For the euro area as a whole, the financial sector support explains only a small part of the sharp increase in general government debt since the start of the crisis, while for some individual countries the impact on government debt has been substantial. Euro area countries used a variety of support measures, including bank recapitalisations, the provision of government loans, the acquisition of impaired assets, bank nationalisations and the granting of government guarantees. These measures impact recorded government 

debt and deficits to different extents. The size of these assistance measures is very 
heterogeneous across euro area countries. The interventions™ overall recovery rate 
is on average relatively low by international comparison. However, the recovery 
process is still ongoing. To complete the picture, it is also important to take the 
fiscal risks related to financial sector support into account, which mainly include the remaining government guarantees granted (amounting to 2.7% of euro area GDP 
at the end of 2014) and the potential losses (or possible holding gains) of asset 
management vehicles. Looking ahead, it is important to secure financial stability while limiting 
taxpayers™ involvement.
 This requires in the first instance reducing the likelihood 
that financial institutions will face severe balance sheet problems. Much has already Table 4
Key features of selected asset management vehiclesYear of creationGovernment shareFinancing (outstanding bond issuance)1)Assets1)percentage of GDPHaircuts on transferred assets2)Net loss (-)/profit (+) in 2014percentage of GDPtotal o/w bank loansper centpercentage of GDPNAMA (Ireland)
200949%7.38.47.2570.2SAREB (Spain)201245%4.34.83.146/63-0.1BAMC (Slovenia)2013100%4.24.73.8710.1Sources: Websites of the asset management vehicles, and Gandrud and Hallerberg (2014, op.cit.).
1) Data refer to outstanding amounts as at the end of 2014.
2)  Average haircuts applied by selected asset management vehicles (see Gandrud and Hallerberg, 2014, op.cit.). As regards Ireland, 

billion as consideration) by the end of 2011. For Spain, the average haircut for the assets transferred was 46% in the case of loans 


87been achieved in tightening banking legislation, strengthening banking supervision, and should financial institutions indeed face problems, having the appropriate resolution instruments at hand. One important way to reduce the potential fiscal costs of financial assistance measures is to ensure an appropriate contribution by private shareholders and bondholders. Indeed, the EU Capital Requirements Regulation and Capital Requirements Directive IV and the newly created Single Supervisory Mechanism will enhance the resilience of the banking sector and should help prevent the build-up of severe problems on banks™ balance sheets which could 

ultimately result in a severe banking crisis. In addition, the EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive and the Single Resolution Mechanism will ensure private sector involvement ahead of government assistance. Taken together, these key pillars 
of the European banking union should ensure that the risk of additional taxpayer support gradually diminishes. S 1StatisticsS 1ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - StatisticsContents 1 External environment
S 2 2 Financial developments
S 3 3 Economic activity
S 8 4 Prices and costs
S 14 5 Money and credit
S 18 6 Fiscal developments
S 23Further information ECB statistics can be accessed from the Statistical Data Warehouse (SDW): 
http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/ Data from the statistics section of the Economic Bulletin are available from the SDW: http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node
=1000004813 A comprehensive Statistics Bulletin can be found in the SDW: 
http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node=1000004045  Methodological definitions can be found in the General Notes to the Statistics Bulletin:http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?no
de=10000023 Details on calculations can be found in the Technical Notes to the Statistics Bulletin:http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?nod
e=10000022 Explanations of terms and abbreviations can be found in the ECB™s statistics glossary: http://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/glossary/
html/glossa.en.htmlConventions used in the tables   
  -data do not exist/data are not applicable 

   
 .data are not yet available
   
 ...nil or negligible

   

 (p)provisional
   
 s.a.seasonally adjusted

   

 n.s.a.non-seasonally adjusted
S 21 External environmentS 2ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics1.1 Main trading partners, GDP and CPI         GDP 1)    CPI   (period-on-period percentage changes)   (annual percentage changes)G20UnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:   OECD countriesUnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:
StatesKingdom
euro areaStatesKingdom
euro area 2)Totalexcluding food
(HICP)(HICP)and energy12345
67
89101112
1320123.02.20.71.77.8-0.82.3
1.82.12.80.02.6
2.520133.01.51.71.67.7-0.41.6
1.61.52.60.42.6
1.420143.32.43.0-0.17.4
0.81.7
1.81.61.52.72.0
0.42014 Q3 0.91.10.7-0.31.9
0.21.8
1.91.81.53.42.0
0.4         Q4 0.80.50.80.31.5
0.41.4
1.81.20.92.51.5
0.22015 Q1 0.70.20.41.11.3
0.40.6
1.7-0.10.12.31.2
-0.3         Q2 . 0.90.7-0.4. 0.30.5
1.60.00.00.51.4
0.22015 Mar. - - - - - - 0.6
1.7-0.10.02.31.4
-0.1         Apr. - - - - - - 0.4
1.6-0.2-0.10.61.5
0.0         May - - - - - - 0.6
1.60.00.10.51.2
0.3         June - - - - - - 0.6
1.60.10.00.41.4
0.2         July - - - - - - 0.6
1.70.20.10.31.6
0.2         Aug.  3) - - - - - - . . . . . . 0.2
Sources: Eurostat (col. 3, 6, 10, 13); BIS (col. 2, 4, 9, 11, 12); OECD (col. 1, 5, 7, 8).1) Quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted.
2) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.3) The figure for the euro area is an estimate based on provisional national data, which usually cover around 95% of the euro area, as well as on early information on energy prices.1.2 Main trading partners, Purchasing Managers™ Index and world trade         Purchasing Managers™ Surveys (diffusion indices; s.a.)   Merchandise         imports 1)   Composite Purchasing Managers™ Index   Global Purchasing Managers™ Index 2)    Global 2)UnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:ManufacturingServicesNew exportGlobalAdvancedEmerging
StatesKingdom
euro areaorderseconomiesmarket
economies12345
678
910
1112
201252.654.452.049.950.947.2
50.251.948.53.72.54.4
201353.354.856.852.651.549.7
52.352.750.73.2-0.25.2
201454.257.357.950.951.152.7
53.454.151.53.53.63.5
2014 Q3 55.659.858.551.352.252.8
53.656.251.62.71.43.4
         Q4 53.355.656.350.951.451.5
52.453.650.41.51.81.3
2015 Q1 53.956.957.450.451.553.3
52.854.350.3-2.71.7-5.0
         Q2 53.455.957.251.351.153.9
50.954.249.3-1.1-1.2-1.0
2015 Mar. 54.959.258.849.451.854.0
52.955.549.8-2.71.7-5.0
         Apr. 54.157.058.450.751.353.9
51.055.149.1-1.90.9-3.4
         May 53.456.055.851.651.253.6
51.254.048.7-1.9-0.3-2.8
         June 52.754.657.451.550.654.2
50.553.450.0-1.1-1.2-1.0
         July 53.155.756.651.550.253.9
50.853.949.1. . . 
         Aug. . 55.0. . . 54.1
50.0. 48.9. . . 
Sources: Markit (col. 1-9); CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis and ECB calculations (col. 10-12).1) Global and advanced economies exclude the euro area. Annual and quarterly data are period-on-period percentages; monthly data are 3-month-on-3-month percentages. All dataare seasonally adjusted.2) Excluding the euro area.S 32 Financial developmentsS 3ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics2.1 Money market interest rates(percentages per annum; period averages)   Euro area 1) United StatesJapanOvernight1-month3-month6-month12-month3-month3-monthdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdeposits(EONIA)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)
(LIBOR)(LIBOR)1234567
20120.230.330.570.831.110.430.1920130.090.130.220.340.540.270.1520140.090.130.210.310.480.230.132015 Feb. -0.040.000.050.130.260.260.10         Mar. -0.05-0.010.030.100.210.270.10         Apr. -0.07-0.030.000.070.180.280.10         May -0.11-0.05-0.010.060.170.280.10         June -0.12-0.06-0.010.050.160.280.10         July -0.12-0.07-0.020.050.170.290.10         Aug. -0.12-0.09-0.030.040.160.320.09Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area, see the General Notes.2.2 Yield curves(End of period; rates in percentages per annum; spreads in percentage points)            Spot rates   Spreads   Instantaneous forward rates   Euro area 1), 2) Euro area 1), 2)United StatesUnited Kingdom
   Euro area 1), 2)3 months1 year2 years5 years10 years10 years10 years10 years1 year2 years5 years10 years
- 1 year- 1 year- 1 year
12345
6789101112
20120.06-0.04-0.010.581.721.761.61
1.48-0.090.171.843.50
20130.080.090.251.072.242.152.91
2.660.180.672.533.88
2014-0.02-0.09-0.120.070.650.741.95
1.45-0.15-0.110.581.77
2015 Feb. -0.21-0.25-0.20-0.080.370.621.80
1.45-0.16-0.170.311.19
         Mar. -0.21-0.25-0.22-0.080.260.511.69
1.19-0.20-0.200.290.81
         Apr. -0.28-0.26-0.210.030.420.681.81
1.39-0.22-0.080.461.05
         May -0.24-0.25-0.230.060.610.851.87
1.32-0.25-0.140.681.46
         June -0.27-0.26-0.230.190.951.212.09
1.52-0.25-0.101.082.09
         July -0.27-0.29-0.260.080.731.021.87
1.35-0.29-0.130.761.84
         Aug. -0.25-0.27-0.220.140.821.091.84
1.46-0.25-0.070.861.97
Source: ECB.
1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area, see the General Notes.
2) ECB calculations based on underlying data provided by EuroMTS and ratings provided by Fitch Ratings.2.3 Stock market indices(index levels in points; period averages)   Dow Jones EURO STOXX indicesUnitedJapan
      States   Benchmark   Main industry indicesBroad50BasicConsumerConsumerOil andFinancialsIndustrialsTechnologyUtilitiesTelecomsHealth careStandardNikkei
indexmaterialsservicesgoodsgas
& Poor™s225
5001234567891011121314
2012239.72,411.9503.7151.9385.7307.2122.1330.2219.2235.9268.5523.31,379.49,102.6
2013281.92,794.0586.3195.0468.2312.8151.5402.7274.1230.6253.4629.41,643.813,577.9
2014318.73,145.3644.3216.6510.6335.5180.0452.9310.8279.2306.7668.11,931.415,460.4
2015 Feb. 353.23,453.8731.3254.2624.8314.0185.5498.7361.1286.9376.8768.62,082.218,053.2
         Mar. 373.93,655.3787.2268.9666.9313.5198.9524.1386.2292.9389.2824.62,080.419,197.6
         Apr. 383.33,733.8798.2275.7678.6331.0204.9535.7394.2299.5395.0861.42,094.919,767.9
         May 373.43,617.9765.0268.9662.1326.5199.3522.4389.5294.0389.2827.62,111.919,974.2
         June 364.03,521.8743.2265.5647.4310.3194.5504.7385.0283.0380.7820.42,099.320,403.8
         July 366.33,545.1744.0266.0645.2302.1198.0505.5378.1281.3395.1864.82,094.120,372.6
         Aug. 356.73,444.4711.9261.9615.0287.7193.9504.6359.9274.9390.0856.92,039.919,919.1
Source: ECB.S 42 Financial developmentsS 4ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics2.4 MFI interest rates on loans to and deposits from households (new business) 1), 2)(Percentages per annum; period average, unless otherwise indicated)            DepositsRevolvingExtended   Loans for consumptionLoans
   Loans for house purchase   loanscredit   
to sole   Over-Redeem-   Withandcard
   By initial periodAPRC
 3)proprietors   By initial periodAPRC
 3)Compositenightable   an agreedoverdraftscredit   of rate fixation
and   of rate fixation
cost-of-at   maturity of:
unincor-borrowingnoticeFloatingOver
poratedFloatingOver 1Over 5Over
indicatorof upUp toOver
rate and1
partner-rate andand upand up10
to 322
up toyear
shipsup toto 5to 10years
monthsyearsyears
1 year1 yearyearsyears
12345678910111213141516
2014 Aug. 0.220.961.201.667.3017.005.516.717.053.062.552.742.712.862.962.73
         Sep. 0.210.951.171.707.3717.065.356.676.992.942.492.692.612.822.882.66
         Oct. 0.200.941.091.657.2016.965.386.596.982.892.422.632.542.782.812.60
         Nov. 0.200.911.011.667.1817.125.586.666.982.922.412.502.512.722.762.53
         Dec. 0.200.890.961.587.1417.105.076.216.532.752.422.522.532.682.762.49
2015 Jan. 0.190.861.011.947.1817.125.256.426.732.762.302.552.432.442.682.40
         Feb. 0.180.840.971.517.1317.055.186.476.822.792.072.472.322.492.582.37
         Mar. 0.170.820.891.377.1317.055.166.166.492.722.112.452.292.412.552.30
         Apr. 0.160.790.871.157.0317.014.896.136.422.662.012.382.172.362.492.24
         May 0.160.820.831.086.9817.085.046.296.602.672.052.332.092.292.452.17
         June 0.150.780.771.186.9717.024.886.146.452.592.022.252.122.312.482.18
         July (p)0.150.740.671.106.8217.045.096.226.502.602.042.262.212.362.562.22
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Including non-profit institutions serving households.3) Annual percentage rate of charge (APRC).2.5 MFI interest rates on loans to and deposits from non-financial corporations (new business) 1), 2)(Percentages per annum; period average, unless otherwise indicated)         DepositsRevolving
   Other loans by size and initial period of rate fixationComposite   loans and
         cost-of-Over-   With an agreedoverdrafts   up to EUR 0.25 million   over EUR 0.25 and up to 1 million   over EUR 1 millionborrowing
night   maturity of:
indicatorFloatingOverOverFloatingOverOverFloatingOverOver
Up toOver
rate3 months1 yearrate3 months1 yearrate3 months1 year
2 years2 years
and up toand up to
and up toand up toand up toand up to
3 months1 year
3 months1 year
3 months1 year
1234567
891011121314
2014 Aug. 0.280.501.563.744.174.273.552.563.202.851.802.422.542.71
         Sep. 0.260.511.463.724.014.033.532.463.012.771.832.382.422.68
         Oct. 0.250.501.373.644.003.943.532.432.902.711.752.252.462.60
         Nov. 0.250.441.163.573.823.863.422.382.842.631.742.172.272.51
         Dec. 0.240.431.263.493.683.753.262.352.782.501.742.162.132.46
2015 Jan. 0.230.441.193.493.783.852.982.312.822.051.672.032.202.46
         Feb. 0.220.351.043.433.573.723.122.242.712.391.521.992.142.37
         Mar. 0.210.321.073.393.453.653.132.162.672.331.632.112.022.37
         Apr. 0.190.300.893.343.463.582.952.182.642.261.621.932.032.33
         May 0.180.300.913.283.373.512.962.152.462.231.571.852.042.27
         June 0.180.311.103.253.193.482.912.092.332.231.601.912.042.26
         July (p)0.170.310.873.193.273.602.862.072.362.221.511.732.052.19
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector.S 52 Financial developmentsS 5ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics2.6 Debt securities issued by euro area residents, by sector of the issuer and initial maturity(EUR billions; transactions during the month and end-of-period outstanding amounts; nominal values)Short-term         Outstanding amounts   Gross issues 1)            TotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General governmentTotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General government
(including   
(including   
Euro-Financial
Non-CentralOther
Euro-Financial
Non-CentralOther
system)corporations
financialgovern-generalsystem)corporations
financialgovern-general
other thanFVCscorporationsmentgovern-
other thanFVCscorporationsmentgovern-
MFIsmentMFIsment12
34
56789
1011121314
20121,426581146- 7555866703491
37- 5210321
20131,247477122- 6752953508314
30- 449921
20141,312545120- 5953850410219
34- 399325
2015 Jan. 1,388599127- 6654354378186
28- 339436
         Feb. 1,400606134- 7053456351162
37- 308339
         Mar. 1,420604137- 7154366373162
45- 358942
         Apr. 1,410600134- 8053362350158
37- 388235
         May 1,396591135- 8053259326140
36- 368033
         June 1,329560121- 7551756298126
30- 347732
Long-term201215,2054,8143,166- 8425,75862425598
45- 168412
201315,1094,4053,087- 9216,06962722270
39- 16899
201415,1204,0403,158- 9946,28664321965
43- 168510
2015 Jan. 15,2224,0583,201- 1,0046,31664226180
48- 811313
         Feb. 15,2664,0383,209- 1,0176,35664620764
21- 188617
         Mar. 15,3554,0263,251- 1,0346,39964428584
62- 1711210
         Apr. 15,2764,0003,213- 1,0346,38964122070
33- 218710
         May 15,3563,9823,235- 1,0376,46264018549
41- 6854
         June 15,3443,9383,255- 1,0326,48563420769
34- 13875
Source: ECB.1) For the purpose of comparison, annual data refer to the average monthly figure over the year.2.7 Growth rates and outstanding amounts of debt securities and listed shares(EUR billions; percentage changes)Oustanding amount         Debt securities   Listed shares      TotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General governmentTotalMFIsFinancialNon-
(including   
corporationsfinancial
Eurosystem)Financial
Non-CentralOther
other thancorporations
corporationsfinancialgovernmentgeneral
MFIsother thanFVCscorporations
governmentMFIs1234
56789
1011
201216,631.55,395.83,312.1.917.06,316.2690.44,597.1404.7617.93,574.5
201316,355.84,881.73,208.6.987.96,597.8679.85,638.0569.1751.04,317.9
201416,432.44,585.53,277.8.1,052.36,823.7693.15,949.4591.0787.94,570.6
2015 Jan. 16,609.54,657.13,327.9.1,069.76,859.1695.66,423.2573.0836.05,014.3
         Feb. 16,665.34,643.53,343.0.1,086.86,890.6701.56,855.9650.5899.75,305.7
         Mar. 16,775.54,630.43,388.6.1,104.86,941.6710.17,056.1688.7933.35,434.0
         Apr. 16,686.74,600.23,347.4.1,113.66,921.8703.66,960.1683.8908.35,368.0
         May 16,751.94,572.23,369.7.1,116.36,994.0699.76,983.6675.3901.65,406.7
         June 16,672.34,498.33,375.7.1,106.57,001.4690.46,803.4664.2879.45,259.8
Growth rate20121.3-1.8-0.3.14.42.56.10.94.92.00.4
2013-1.4-8.9-3.4.8.14.5-1.10.97.20.20.3
2014-0.7-7.80.1.4.93.11.21.57.21.60.8
2015 Jan. -0.7-7.80.6.3.03.21.81.56.91.50.7
         Feb. -0.9-7.60.6.4.42.40.71.46.81.20.7
         Mar. -0.2-7.12.3.5.32.61.81.56.81.40.8
         Apr. -0.3-6.81.7.6.72.11.91.56.81.10.8
         May -0.8-7.20.1.5.82.11.41.35.81.20.7
         June -1.1-7.70.8.4.61.6-0.81.04.10.60.7
Source: ECB.S 62 Financial developmentsS 6ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics2.8 Effective exchange rates 1)(period averages; index: 1999 Q1=100)         EER-19   EER-38NominalReal CPIReal PPIReal GDPReal ULCM
 2)Real ULCTNominalReal CPI
deflator12345678
201297.695.093.388.399.795.8
107.092.5
2013101.298.296.791.4102.599.1
111.995.6
2014101.897.996.791.6102.8100.7
114.796.1
2014 Q3 101.397.296.290.8102.2100.3
113.795.1
         Q4 99.094.994.389.199.798.1
112.393.5
2015 Q1 93.089.289.484.293.792.6
106.488.3
         Q2 91.287.588.2...104.486.3
2015 Mar. 90.686.987.4- - - 103.886.0
         Apr. 89.786.186.9- - - 102.484.8
         May 91.687.988.6- - - 104.786.6
         June 92.388.589.1- - - 106.087.6
         July 91.387.588.3- - - 105.186.7
         Aug. 93.089.090.0- - - 108.189.1
Percentage change versus previous month2015 Aug. 1.81.81.9- - - 2.9
2.8Percentage change versus previous year2015 Aug. -8.4-8.7-6.6- - - -5.2
-6.6Source: ECB.1) For a definition of the trading partner groups and other information see the General Notes to the Statistics Bulletin.
2) ULCM-deflated series are available only for the EER-19 trading partner group.2.9 Bilateral exchange rates(period averages; units of national currency per euro)ChineseCroatianCzechDanishHungarianJapanesePolishPoundRomanianSwedishSwissUS
renminbikunakorunakroneforintyenzlotysterlingleukronafrancDollar
123456789101112
20128.1057.52225.1497.444289.249102.4924.1850.8114.45938.7041.2051.285
20138.1657.57925.9807.458296.873129.6634.1970.8494.41908.6521.2311.328
20148.1867.63427.5367.455308.706140.3064.1840.8064.44379.0991.2151.329
2014 Q3 8.1737.62327.6197.452312.242137.7494.1750.7944.41469.2051.2121.326
         Q4 7.6827.66527.6307.442308.527142.7544.2110.7894.43369.2721.2051.250
2015 Q1 7.0237.68127.6247.450308.889134.1214.1930.7434.45169.3801.0721.126
         Q2 6.8577.57427.3797.462306.100134.2894.0880.7214.44429.3001.0411.105
2015 Mar. 6.7627.64727.3797.459303.445130.4104.1260.7244.43399.2451.0611.084
         Apr. 6.6867.59027.4397.466299.429128.9354.0180.7214.41559.3251.0381.078
         May 6.9167.55927.3977.461306.327134.7484.0810.7214.44779.3041.0391.115
         June 6.9597.57227.3077.460311.960138.7404.1590.7214.46719.2721.0451.121
         July 6.8277.58627.0947.462311.531135.6814.1520.7074.43919.3861.0491.100
         Aug. 7.0637.55827.0417.463311.614137.1244.1950.7144.42359.5151.0781.114
Percentage change versus previous month2015 Aug. 3.5-0.4-0.20.00.01.11.01.0-0.41.42.71.3
Percentage change versus previous year2015 Aug. -13.8-1.0-2.80.1-0.70.00.1-10.40.03.6-11.1-16.3
Source: ECB.S 72 Financial developmentsS 7ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics2.10 Euro area balance of payments, financial account(EUR billions, unless otherwise indicated; outstanding amounts at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts (international investment position)               Total 1)    Direct   PortfolioNet   Other investmentReserveMemo:
      investment   investmentfinancial   
assetsGross
derivativesexternalAssetsLiabilitiesNetAssetsLiabilitiesAssetsLiabilities
AssetsLiabilities
debt123456789101112
2014 Q2 18,472.219,741.3-1,269.27,542.85,630.55,960.89,449.4-70.34,532.24,661.5506.811,426.2
         Q3 19,220.120,468.0-1,247.87,797.75,900.76,306.29,713.4-55.74,652.34,853.9519.711,836.4
         Q4 19,351.720,748.8-1,397.17,568.95,998.86,509.39,915.2-43.64,782.74,834.7534.411,869.4
2015 Q1 21,087.322,381.9-1,294.58,204.46,331.77,270.910,995.3-21.05,029.95,054.9603.112,632.8
Outstanding amounts as a percentage of GDP2015 Q1 207.6220.4-12.780.862.371.6108.3-0.249.549.85.9124.4
Transactions2014 Q3 209.6119.290.569.144.7104.119.820.317.554.7-1.3-
         Q4 57.8-3.261.056.173.593.2-2.710.2-104.7-74.02.9-
2015 Q1 504.8513.7-8.8159.774.7129.0260.327.3182.8178.76.0-
         Q2 62.2-23.685.762.352.4133.513.87.5-138.8-89.7-2.4-
2015 Jan. 337.8429.2-91.456.567.353.8133.77.1218.8228.21.5-
         Feb. 93.9107.5-13.651.118.929.976.09.7-1.112.64.2-
         Mar. 73.2-23.096.252.1-11.545.350.510.5-35.0-62.00.3-
         Apr. 111.8121.5-9.615.424.133.2-19.55.861.3116.8-3.9-
         May 22.8-0.523.331.113.274.654.24.3-85.6-67.9-1.6-
         June -72.5-144.572.015.815.025.7-21.0-2.5-114.6-138.63.1-
12-month cumulated transactions2015 June 834.4606.1228.4347.3245.2459.8291.165.3-43.369.75.2-
12-month cumulated transactions as a percentage of GDP2015 June 8.26.02.23.42.44.52.90.6-0.40.70.1-
Source: ECB.1) Net financial derivatives are included in total assets.S 83 Economic activityS 8ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics3.1 GDP and expenditure components(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Current prices (EUR billions)   GDP      Total   Domestic demand   External balanceTotalPrivateGovernment
   Gross fixed capital formationChanges inTotalExportsImports
consumptionconsumption
inventoriesTotalTotalIntellectual
constructionmachineryproperty products
12
345
67
89101112
20129,840.19,581.25,544.42,065.41,979.31,035.7580.8
358.0-7.9258.94,288.94,030.0
20139,931.79,598.45,571.92,094.91,940.41,006.3568.9
360.3-8.8333.24,362.74,029.5
201410,103.59,729.95,651.12,127.71,970.91,001.8591.8
372.2-19.7373.54,494.44,120.8
2014 Q2 2,520.62,428.21,409.4530.1490.8249.4147.4
92.7-2.192.41,118.11,025.6
         Q3 2,531.52,437.51,416.6534.2493.2249.1149.2
93.7-6.594.01,135.01,041.0
         Q4 2,544.92,444.21,423.4534.3496.4251.0150.0
94.1-9.8100.71,142.11,041.4
2015 Q1 2,564.92,458.31,425.2538.8500.1252.1151.9
94.8-5.8106.61,144.31,037.6
as a percentage of GDP2014100.096.355.921.119.5
9.95.9
3.7-0.23.7- - 
Chain-linked volumes (prices for the previous year)quarter-on-quarter percentage changes2014 Q3 0.20.30.50.20.1-0.71.1
0.8- - 1.41.7
         Q4 0.40.40.40.10.4
0.70.0
0.2- - 0.80.8
2015 Q1 0.40.60.50.60.8
0.61.3
0.5- - 0.61.2
         Q2 0.3. . . . . . . - - . . 
annual percentage changes2012-0.8-2.3-1.3-0.1-3.7-4.2-5.1
1.2- - 2.7-0.7
2013-0.4-0.7-0.60.2-2.4-3.3-1.7
-0.3- - 2.01.3
20140.80.91.00.61.2-1.34.5
2.8- - 3.84.1
2014 Q3 0.80.61.00.60.6-2.94.8
3.5- - 4.13.9
         Q4 0.91.01.50.70.5-1.52.5
2.7- - 4.14.6
2015 Q1 1.01.31.71.10.8-1.33.4
2.2- - 4.25.1
         Q2 1.2. . . . . . . - - . . 
contributions to quarter-on-quarter percentage changes in GDP; percentage points2014 Q3 0.20.30.30.00.0-0.10.1
0.0-0.1-0.1- - 
         Q4 0.40.30.20.00.1
0.10.0
0.00.00.0- - 
2015 Q1 0.40.60.30.10.2
0.10.1
0.00.1-0.2- - 
         Q2 0.3. . . . . . . . . - - 
contributions to annual percentage changes in GDP; percentage points2012-0.8-2.3-0.70.0-0.8-1.8-1.3
0.2-0.81.4- - 
2013-0.4-0.7-0.40.0-0.5-1.4-0.4
0.00.10.4- - 
20140.80.80.50.10.2-0.51.0
0.4-0.10.0- - 
2014 Q3 0.80.60.60.10.1-0.30.3
0.1-0.20.2- - 
         Q4 0.90.90.80.20.1-0.20.1
0.1-0.1-0.1- - 
2015 Q1 1.01.20.90.20.2-0.10.2
0.1-0.1-0.2- - 
         Q2 1.2. . . . . . . . . - - 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.S 93 Economic activityS 9ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics3.2 Value added by economic activity(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Current prices (EUR billions)   Gross value added (basic prices)Taxes lesssubsidiesTotalAgriculture,ManufacturingConst-Trade,Infor-FinanceRealProfessional,Public ad-Arts, enter-on
forestry andenergy andructiontransport,mationandestatebusiness andministration,tainmentproducts
fishingutilities
accom-and com-insurance
supporteducation,and other
modationmunica-
serviceshealth andservices
and foodtion
social workservices12345678
9101112
20128,845.3151.31,728.4467.21,675.9410.3439.11,016.3924.61,717.9314.4994.8
20138,924.2154.51,740.7460.11,684.8407.2440.61,032.5937.11,748.0318.71,007.5
20149,068.0148.91,763.9461.31,709.3410.9450.01,054.0960.21,784.1325.21,035.5
2014 Q2 2,261.438.0440.2115.0425.5102.6113.2262.9239.0444.180.9259.3
         Q3 2,272.136.9442.6114.6428.6102.9112.8263.8240.9447.681.6259.4
         Q4 2,283.335.8445.7115.7431.6103.2112.1265.6242.9448.782.0261.6
2015 Q1 2,306.136.6449.7116.7437.6103.9113.8266.9245.2453.182.5258.9
as a percentage of value added2014100.01.619.55.118.94.55.011.610.619.73.6
- Chain-linked volumes (prices for the previous year)quarter-on-quarter percentage changes2014 Q2 0.0-0.1
0.0-1.6-0.10.6-0.30.3
0.40.1-0.21.1
         Q3 0.20.9
0.0-1.00.40.80.40.2
0.60.10.6-0.4
         Q4 0.2-2.1
0.20.70.50.1-0.20.3
0.40.20.11.3
2015 Q1 0.41.4
0.30.50.90.70.50.1
0.70.10.1-0.2
annual percentage changes2012-0.6-3.0-0.5-5.9-1.32.50.70.0
-0.90.2-0.6-2.6
2013-0.32.5-0.5-2.9-0.5-0.1-1.71.0
0.20.0-0.4-1.2
20140.93.7
0.4-0.71.31.8-0.51.3
1.50.70.70.7
2014 Q2 0.84.3
0.3-0.61.11.9-0.61.3
1.20.80.40.4
         Q3 0.84.8
0.4-1.91.12.2-0.11.3
1.50.70.60.3
         Q4 0.80.2
0.1-1.31.31.60.21.3
2.00.50.81.6
2015 Q1 0.90.1
0.6-1.51.72.20.50.9
2.00.50.61.9
contributions to quarter-on-quarter percentage changes in value added; percentage points2014 Q2 0.00.0
0.0-0.10.00.00.00.0
0.00.00.0
-          Q3 0.20.0
0.0-0.10.10.00.00.0
0.10.00.0
-          Q4 0.20.0
0.00.00.10.00.00.0
0.00.00.0
- 2015 Q1 0.40.0
0.10.00.20.00.00.0
0.10.00.0
- contributions to annual percentage changes in value added; percentage points2012-0.60.0-0.1-0.3-0.30.10.00.0
-0.10.00.0
- 2013-0.30.0-0.1-0.2-0.10.0-0.10.1
0.00.00.0
- 20140.90.1
0.10.00.20.10.00.1
0.20.10.0
- 2014 Q2 0.80.1
0.10.00.20.10.00.2
0.10.20.0
-          Q3 0.80.1
0.1-0.10.20.10.00.2
0.20.10.0
-          Q4 0.80.0
0.0-0.10.30.10.00.1
0.20.10.0
- 2015 Q1 0.90.0
0.1-0.10.30.10.00.1
0.20.10.0
- Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.S 103 Economic activityS 10ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics3.3 Employment 1)(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Persons employed       Total   By employment
   By economic activity   status   Employ-Self-Agricul-Manufac-Con-Trade,Infor-FinanceRealProfessional,Public adminis-Arts,
eesemployedture,turing,struc-transport,mationandestatebusiness andtration, edu-entertainment
forestryenergytionaccom-andinsur-
supportcation, healthand other
andand
modationcom-ance
servicesandservices
fishingutilities
and foodmunica-
social workservicestion
12345678910
111213as a percentage of total persons employed2012100.084.915.13.415.46.424.82.72.71.012.7
23.87.02013100.085.015.03.415.36.224.82.72.71.012.8
24.07.12014100.085.114.93.415.26.024.92.72.71.013.0
24.07.1annual percentage changes2012-0.5-0.5-0.1-1.1-0.6-4.5-0.61.0-0.50.2
0.7-0.10.62013-0.7-0.7-0.8-1.2-1.5-4.3-0.5-0.1-1.2-0.9
0.20.00.020140.60.8-0.40.9-0.1-1.80.81.1-0.90.7
2.00.70.62014 Q2 0.60.8-0.50.7-0.1-1.90.90.9-1.30.6
2.10.70.2         Q3 0.71.0-0.50.50.1-1.31.01.3-0.90.9
2.10.70.7         Q4 0.91.1-0.50.60.3-1.50.91.4-0.60.9
2.50.71.82015 Q1 0.81.0-0.20.10.4-0.11.11.2-0.71.5
2.50.50.4Hours workedas a percentage of total hours worked2012100.080.020.04.415.77.225.82.82.81.012.4
21.56.32013100.080.020.04.415.76.925.92.82.71.012.5
21.76.42014100.080.219.84.415.66.725.92.82.71.012.7
21.86.3annual percentage changes2012-1.8-1.8-1.5-2.1-2.2-7.0-2.10.5-1.3-0.8
-0.5-0.6-0.42013-1.3-1.3-1.2-1.5-1.7-5.6-1.1-0.3-1.6-1.9
-0.5-0.5-0.820140.60.9-0.30.80.4-1.40.81.0-1.30.2
2.00.90.22014 Q2 0.40.7-0.80.2-0.4-1.90.70.9-2.00.0
1.90.90.1         Q3 0.61.0-0.90.30.3-1.60.91.0-1.5-0.2
2.00.80.1         Q4 1.11.30.21.80.9-0.71.01.4-1.31.3
2.70.91.62015 Q1 0.60.8-0.31.20.4-0.20.60.8-1.32.0
2.10.40.5Hours worked per person employedannual percentage changes2012-1.3-1.3-1.4-1.0-1.6-2.6-1.5-0.5-0.7-1.0
-1.1-0.6-1.02013-0.6-0.7-0.4-0.4-0.2-1.3-0.6-0.3-0.4-1.0
-0.8-0.5-0.820140.10.10.1-0.10.50.30.0-0.1-0.3-0.5
-0.10.2-0.42014 Q2 -0.2-0.1-0.3-0.5-0.30.0-0.20.0-0.7-0.7
-0.30.1-0.1         Q3 -0.10.0-0.3-0.20.2-0.3-0.1-0.3-0.6-1.1
-0.10.1-0.6         Q4 0.20.20.61.10.60.70.10.0-0.70.3
0.20.2-0.22015 Q1 -0.2-0.10.01.10.0-0.1-0.5-0.4-0.50.5
-0.4-0.10.2Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Data for employment are based on the ESA 2010.S 11
3 Economic activityS 11ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics3.4 Labour force, unemployment and job vacancies(seasonally adjusted, unless otherwise indicated)LabourUnder-
   UnemploymentJobforce,employ-   
      vacancymillions 1)ment,   TotalLong-term
   By age   By genderrate 2)% ofunemploy-   
         labourMillions% ofment,   Adult
   Youth   Male   Femaleforce 1)labour% of
forcelabourMillions% ofMillions% ofMillions% ofMillions% of% of total
force 1)labourlabourlabourlabourposts
forceforceforceforce1234567891011121314
% of total  100.0  81.3 18.7 53.6 46.4  
in 2013              
2012159.1113.918.18711.45.214.63010.13.55723.69.75811.38.42911.51.6
2013159.3344.619.23312.05.915.64010.83.59324.310.30711.98.92612.11.5
2014160.3154.618.62511.66.115.21310.43.41223.79.91711.58.70811.81.7
2014 Q3 160.4754.418.54411.65.915.14810.43.39723.69.81711.38.72611.81.6
         Q4 160.9664.618.40211.56.115.08110.33.32223.29.75311.38.64911.71.8
2015 Q1 160.0844.717.98111.25.914.74110.13.24022.79.56011.18.42211.41.7
         Q2 . . 17.75911.1. 14.58910.03.17022.39.40210.98.35611.3. 
2015 Feb. - - 17.95611.2- 14.72010.13.23622.79.54211.08.41511.4- 
         Mar. - - 17.91211.2- 14.68810.13.22422.69.51311.08.39911.4- 
         Apr. - - 17.79011.1- 14.59410.03.19622.49.41210.98.37811.3- 
         May - - 17.74111.1- 14.58810.03.15322.29.41710.98.32311.2- 
         June - - 17.74511.1- 14.58410.03.16122.39.37710.98.36811.3- 
         July - - 17.53210.9- 14.4399.93.09321.99.26510.78.26711.2- 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Not seasonally adjusted.
2) The job vacancy rate is equal to the number of job vacancies divided by the sum of the number of occupied posts and the number of job vacancies, expressed as a percentage.3.5 Short-term business statistics   Industrial productionCon-ECB indicator
   Retail salesNew      structionon industrial
passenger   Total   Main Industrial Groupingsproduc-new ordersTotalFood,Non-foodFuelcar regis-
   (excluding construction)   tionbeverages,trationstobaccoManu-Inter-CapitalConsumerEnergy
facturingmediategoodsgoods
goods1234567
8910111213
% of total100.086.033.629.222.514.7100.0100.0100.039.351.59.1100.0
in 2010             
annual percentage changes2012-2.4-2.6-4.4-1.0-2.5-0.1-5.8
-3.8-1.6-1.3-1.5-5.0-11.1
2013-0.7-0.7-1.0-0.6-0.4-0.8-2.3
-0.1-0.8-0.9-0.6-0.9-4.4
20140.81.71.21.82.6-5.51.7
3.31.30.32.40.43.7
2014 Q3 0.61.20.41.51.9-3.1-1.4
2.30.8-0.32.0-0.34.1
         Q4 0.30.9-0.40.92.6-3.2-0.8
2.91.90.82.91.51.6
2015 Q1 1.61.1-0.11.12.34.6-1.6
1.02.11.03.12.29.0
         Q2 1.21.50.72.60.8-0.9-1.0
4.72.11.13.12.36.9
2015 Jan. 0.70.2-0.20.50.32.60.4
0.62.42.02.92.711.0
         Feb. 2.01.2-0.31.42.56.9-3.5
0.92.41.03.53.18.1
         Mar. 2.11.90.21.24.14.5-2.0
1.51.60.22.91.08.2
         Apr. 0.80.90.02.1-0.10.9-1.2
2.82.61.43.62.96.4
         May 1.62.32.04.10.3-3.60.2
4.32.61.93.42.26.8
         June 1.21.40.21.72.10.0-2.3
7.01.20.12.31.87.5
month-on-month percentage changes (s.a.)2015 Jan. 0.2-0.20.00.0-0.51.51.0
-2.20.60.71.10.51.5
         Feb. 1.01.00.10.62.51.3-1.4
0.10.0-0.60.5-0.70.0
         Mar. -0.5-0.3-0.1-0.30.0-1.80.6
0.6-0.4-0.4-0.2-0.8-0.6
         Apr. 0.10.20.10.5-0.4-1.0-0.3
2.40.71.00.20.60.8
         May -0.20.20.11.2-0.3-2.90.2
-0.10.10.30.2-0.2-1.5
         June -0.4-0.9-0.5-1.8-0.33.2-1.9
2.1-0.6-0.8-0.20.01.6
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations, ECB experimental statistics (col. 8) and European Automobile Manufacturers Association (col. 13).S 123 Economic activityS 12ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics3.6 Opinion surveys(seasonally adjusted)         European Commission Business and Consumer Surveys   Purchasing Managers™ Surveys   (percentage balances, unless otherwise indicated)   (diffusion indices)      Economic   Manufacturing industryConsumerConstructionRetail   Service industriesPurchasingManu-BusinessComposite
sentimentconfidenceconfidencetrade
Managers™facturingactivityoutput
indicatorIndustrialCapacityindicatorindicatorconfid-ServicesCapacityIndex (PMI)outputfor
(long-termconfidenceutilisation
enceconfidenceutilisationfor manu-
servicesaverageindicator(%)
indicatorindicator(%)facturing
= 100)123
456
789101112
1999-13100.2-6.180.9-12.8-13.8-8.76.6
- 51.052.452.952.7
201290.5-11.678.9-22.0-27.7-15.0-6.586.546.246.347.647.2
201393.8-9.178.7-18.7-29.2-12.2-5.487.149.650.649.349.7
2014101.6-3.980.4-10.1-27.4-3.24.887.651.853.352.552.7
2014 Q3 101.2-4.680.4-10.0-27.3-3.94.587.750.951.653.252.8
         Q4 100.8-4.580.8-11.3-24.3-5.15.387.950.451.251.751.5
2015 Q1 102.6-4.081.1-6.3-24.9-1.65.688.251.452.653.653.3
         Q2 103.7-3.281.1-5.3-24.9-0.27.688.352.353.454.153.9
2015 Mar. 103.9-2.9- -3.7-24.2-0.86.1
- 52.253.654.254.0
         Apr. 103.8-3.281.2-4.6-25.5-0.87.088.552.053.454.153.9
         May 103.8-3.0- -5.6-25.01.57.9
- 52.253.353.853.6
         June 103.5-3.4- -5.6-24.2-1.37.9
- 52.553.654.454.2
         July 104.0-2.981.1-7.2-23.81.18.988.152.453.654.053.9
         Aug. 104.2-3.7- -6.9-22.73.110.2
- 52.353.954.354.1
Sources: European Commission (Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs) (col. 1-8) and Markit (col. 9-12).3.7 Summary accounts for households and non-financial corporations(current prices, unless otherwise indicated; not seasonally adjusted)         Households   Non-financial corporationsSavingDebtReal grossFinancialNon-financialNetHous-ProfitSavingDebtFinancialNon-financialFinan-
ratioratiodisposableinvestmentinvestmentworthingshare
 3)ratioratio
 4)investmentinvestmentcing
(gross) 1)income(gross) 2)wealth(net)(gross)                                                             Percentage of      Percentage of netPercent-
      gross disposable   Annual percentage changes   value addedage of   Annual percentage changes
   income (adjusted)      GDP   12
34567891011
1213
201113.097.8-0.11.9
1.80.51.133.63.7.3.010.12.0
201212.697.4-1.81.7-4.60.6-2.331.01.8133.31.4-6.21.0
201312.796.0-0.51.4-3.50.4-2.230.63.1131.92.2-1.71.1
2014 Q2 12.695.50.41.5-0.22.7-0.130.93.2132.42.4
2.01.2
         Q3 12.795.01.61.7-0.72.70.431.53.2132.12.0
1.91.0
         Q4 12.795.11.31.7-0.52.30.732.22.6133.11.9
0.91.1
2015 Q1 12.794.72.21.9-0.13.81.3.2.7135.32.5
1.01.5
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.1) Based on four-quarter cumulated sums of both saving and gross disposable income (adjusted for the change in the net equity of households in pension fund reserves).2) Financial assets (net of financial liabilities) and non-financial assets. Non-financial assets consist mainly of housing wealth (residential structures and land). They also includenon-financial assets of unincorporated enterprises classified within the household sector.3) The profit share uses net entrepreneurial income, which is broadly equivalent to current profits in business accounting. 
4) Based on the outstanding amount of loans, debt securities, trade credits and pension scheme liabilities.S 133 Economic activityS 13ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics3.8 Euro area balance of payments, current and capital accounts(EUR billions; seasonally adjusted unless otherwise indicated; transactions)         Current account   Capital                  account 1)   Total   Goods   Services   Primary income   Secondary income   
CreditDebitNetCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebit
12345678910111213
2014 Q3 835.8778.157.7491.2428.7175.5157.9144.9136.324.255.26.82.6
         Q4 842.7784.957.8505.3430.4177.9164.6135.6130.824.059.112.85.3
2015 Q1 865.3783.681.7509.0432.6182.1165.6149.2127.125.058.38.44.5
         Q2 870.2801.968.3520.0439.3182.6166.8141.8134.825.961.09.75.7
2015 Jan. 282.9255.127.9166.7139.859.654.048.242.58.518.72.31.5
         Feb. 287.7260.527.2170.5142.960.755.648.041.98.520.22.61.2
         Mar. 294.7268.126.7171.8149.961.956.053.042.78.019.43.51.8
         Apr. 292.8269.023.8174.3145.859.756.250.945.77.921.32.41.3
         May 291.5272.419.1172.9147.962.255.646.846.09.622.93.71.5
         June 285.9260.525.4172.8145.660.655.044.143.18.416.83.52.9
12-month cumulated transactions2015 June 3,414.03,148.5265.52,025.41,731.0718.1654.9571.4529.099.1233.637.718.1
12-month cumulated transactions as a percentage of GDP2015 June 33.631.02.619.917.07.16.45.65.21.02.30.40.2
1) The capital account is not seasonally adjusted.3.9 Euro area external trade in goods 1), values and volumes by product group 2)(seasonally adjusted, unless otherwise indicated)Values (EUR billions; annual percentage changes for columns 1 and 2)            Total (n.s.a.)   Exports (f.o.b.)   Imports (c.i.f.)            TotalMemo item:   Total   Memo items:ExportsImportsIntermediateCapitalConsump-Manu-IntermediateCapitalConsump-Manu-Oil
goodsgoodstionfacturing
goodsgoodstionfacturing
goodsgoods123
45
678
91011
1213
2014 Q3 2.90.4486.1236.196.9139.5397.7439.5269.462.1101.0287.773.3
         Q4 4.50.0498.3237.4102.4145.1409.4435.6260.363.3102.9293.565.9
2015 Q1 5.11.5503.9240.5103.7148.5420.0444.1258.969.5108.7312.558.3
         Q2 7.83.8517.4
. . . 429.8452.6
. . . 313.7. 
2015 Jan. -0.7-5.6163.978.434.047.6135.9143.083.122.435.1100.219.2
         Feb. 4.31.0168.680.535.149.7141.0147.486.123.336.0104.418.9
         Mar. 11.09.1171.481.634.651.3143.1153.789.823.937.6107.920.2
         Apr. 8.64.8173.481.735.451.3144.0151.889.123.736.3105.419.3
         May 2.5-0.2170.880.734.350.9141.4149.586.822.336.7103.019.0
         June 12.36.6173.1
. . . 144.4151.3
. . . 105.4. 
Volume indices (2000 = 100; annual percentage changes for columns 1 and 2)2014 Q3 1.22.1114.5112.6114.4116.4114.7101.5101.1100.4103.0104.688.8
         Q4 3.12.0117.2113.7119.3121.0116.9102.0101.998.5102.5104.297.0
2015 Q1 2.54.8117.3114.5118.7121.9117.7105.1105.7103.5104.8107.3111.0
         Q2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2015 Jan. -1.5-0.3115.8113.0117.9119.7115.3103.8104.1102.8103.1105.0117.3
         Feb. 1.54.7117.7115.0120.7121.9118.8104.7105.6105.2103.6107.7108.9
         Mar. 7.010.1118.3115.6117.6124.1119.2106.8107.4102.6107.8109.3106.8
         Apr. 3.12.8118.3114.6119.0122.4118.5104.0104.6101.8102.8105.898.8
         May -2.5-2.3116.2113.0116.5120.2116.3102.0101.097.3103.5104.091.2
         June . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.1) Differences between ECB™s b.o.p. goods (Table 3.8) and Eurostat™s trade in goods (Table 3.9) are mainly due to different definitions.2) Product groups as classified in the Broad Economic Categories.S 144 Prices and costsS 14ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics4.1 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1)(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)            Total   Total (s.a.; percentage change vis-à-vis previous period)   Memo item:
   Administered pricesIndex:   TotalGoodsServicesTotalProcessedUnpro-Non-energyEnergyServices
2005foodcessedindustrial(n.s.a.)
Total HICPAdminis-
= 100Totalfoodgoods
excludingtered
excludingadministeredprices
food andpricesenergy12345678
91011
1213
% of total100.0100.069.756.543.5100.012.27.526.310.643.587.112.9
in 2015             
2012115.62.51.53.01.8-
--
---
2.33.8
2013117.21.41.11.31.4-
--
---
1.22.1
2014117.70.40.8-0.21.2-
--
---
0.21.9
2014 Q3 117.70.40.8-0.31.20.10.20.20.0-0.40.3
0.21.6
         Q4 117.80.20.7-0.61.2-0.20.00.40.0-3.00.2
-0.11.7
2015 Q1 116.8-0.30.7-1.41.1-0.30.20.50.1-4.20.2
-0.51.2
         Q2 118.40.20.8-0.51.10.50.30.60.22.40.4
0.10.9
2015 Mar. 117.9-0.10.6-0.91.00.20.1-0.10.11.70.0
-0.31.1
         Apr. 118.20.00.6-0.71.00.10.20.40.10.10.0
-0.10.9
         May 118.50.30.9-0.41.30.3-0.10.20.10.90.3
0.31.0
         June 118.50.20.8-0.41.10.00.1-0.10.0-0.10.0
0.10.9
         July 117.70.21.0-0.51.20.00.0-0.30.2-0.70.2
0.10.9
         Aug.  2) 117.80.21.0. 1.2-0.10.00.80.1-2.20.1
. . 
         Goods   Services            Food (including alcoholic   Industrial goods   HousingTransportCommuni-RecreationMiscel-
   beverages and tobacco)      cationandlaneous
personalTotalProcessedUnpro-TotalNon-energyEnergy
Rentsfoodcessed
industrialfoodgoods14151617
1819202122232425
% of total19.712.27.536.9
26.310.610.76.47.33.114.87.5
in 2015            
20123.13.13.03.0
1.27.61.81.52.9-3.22.22.0
20132.72.23.50.6
0.60.61.71.52.4-4.22.20.7
20140.51.2-0.8-0.5
0.1-1.91.71.41.7-2.81.51.3
2014 Q3 -0.11.0-2.0-0.4
0.1-1.81.71.31.7-3.11.51.3
         Q4 0.30.7-0.3-1.1
-0.1-3.61.61.41.6-2.61.41.4
2015 Q1 0.30.50.1-2.3
-0.1-7.71.31.31.4-1.91.31.2
         Q2 1.10.71.8-1.4
0.2-5.31.21.21.2-0.91.41.2
2015 Mar. 0.60.60.7-1.7
0.0-6.01.21.21.4-1.71.11.3
         Apr. 1.00.71.3-1.6
0.1-5.81.21.30.7-1.21.21.2
         May 1.20.62.1-1.2
0.2-4.81.21.21.6-0.81.81.3
         June 1.10.71.9-1.3
0.3-5.11.21.21.2-0.81.31.1
         July 0.90.61.4-1.3
0.4-5.61.21.11.5-0.71.61.0
         Aug.  2) 1.20.62.3. 0.6-7.1. . . . . . 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Estimate based on provisional national data, which usually cover around 95% of the euro area, as well as on early information on energy prices.S 154 Prices and costsS 15ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics4.2 Industry, construction and property prices(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)   Industrial producer prices excluding constructionCon-ResidentialExperimental
      structionpropertyindicator of
Total   Total
   Industry excluding construction and energyEnergy
prices 1)commercial(index:   property2010 = 100)Manu-TotalIntermediateCapital   Consumer goods
prices 1), 2)facturinggoodsgoods
TotalFood,Non-
beveragesfood
and tobacco1234
567
891011
1213% of total100.0100.078.072.129.320.022.713.88.927.9   
in 2010             
2012108.72.82.01.4
0.71.02.53.50.96.61.5
-1.7-0.12013108.5-0.2-0.10.4-0.60.61.72.60.3-1.60.3
-2.0-1.62014106.9-1.5-0.9-0.3-1.10.40.1-0.20.3-4.40.3
0.21.32014 Q3 106.8-1.4-0.6-0.1-0.60.5-0.1-0.50.3-4.50.4
0.52.1         Q4 106.0-1.9-1.6-0.3-0.70.6-0.6-1.20.2-5.80.2
0.72.82015 Q1 104.5-2.9-2.6-0.6-1.50.7-0.7-1.30.2-8.50.3
1.1.          Q2 104.9-2.1-1.7-0.3-0.70.7-0.8-1.40.1-6.5. . . 
2015 Feb. 104.6-2.8-2.6-0.7-1.70.7-0.7-1.30.3-8.1- - - 
         Mar. 104.9-2.3-1.9-0.5-1.20.7-0.6-1.10.3-6.8- - - 
         Apr. 104.8-2.1-1.8-0.4-0.80.8-0.8-1.40.1-6.4- - - 
         May 104.9-2.0-1.5-0.3-0.60.7-0.8-1.30.0-6.3- - - 
         June 104.9-2.1-1.8-0.4-0.60.7-0.8-1.40.1-6.8- - - 
         July 104.7-2.1-2.0-0.4-0.70.7-0.8-1.40.2-6.5- - - 
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations, and ECB calculations based on MSCI data and national sources (col. 13).1) Experimental data based on non-harmonised sources (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/intro/html/experiment.en.html for further details).2) Data refer to the Euro 19.4.3 Commodity prices and GDP deflators(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)   GDP deflatorsOil prices   Non-energy commodity prices  (EUR)
   (EUR per      TotalTotal   Domestic demand
Exports 1)Imports 1)barrel)   Import-weighted
 2)   Use-weighted 2)(s.a.;index:TotalPrivateGovern-Gross
TotalFoodNon-foodTotalFoodNon-food
2010consump-mentfixed
= 100)tionconsump-capital
tionformation
123456789101112131415
% of total         100.035.065.0100.045.055.0
               
2012102.41.31.51.90.81.21.92.586.6-7.20.2-10.5-3.15.8-9.1
2013103.71.30.91.11.20.4-0.3-1.381.7-9.0-13.4-6.9-8.3-10.1-6.9
2014104.60.90.50.41.00.4-0.7-1.774.5-8.8-1.6-12.1-4.60.7-8.7
2014 Q3 104.70.90.50.31.10.5-0.5-1.578.0-6.2-1.7-8.3-2.10.2-3.8
         Q4 104.90.90.30.20.90.6-0.5-1.961.5-5.56.2-10.81.39.3-4.7
2015 Q1 105.31.00.0-0.20.70.5-0.5-2.949.0-0.48.7-4.95.611.60.7
         Q2 . . . . . . . . 57.4-0.52.1-2.04.05.62.6
2015 Mar. - - - - - - - - 52.41.04.6-1.06.27.94.7
         Apr. - - - - - - - - 56.6-1.43.4-4.04.97.82.4
         May - - - - - - - - 58.9-0.2-0.3-0.13.83.34.2
         June - - - - - - - - 56.7-0.13.1-1.93.35.91.1
         July - - - - - - - - 51.7-3.611.1-11.00.59.8-7.1
         Aug. - - - - - - - - 43.0-7.54.7-13.7-4.05.5-11.6
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations and Thomson Reuters (col. 9).1) Deflators for exports and imports refer to goods and services and include cross-border trade within the euro area.
2) Import-weighted: weighted according to 2004-06 average import structure; use-weighted: weighted according to 2004-06 average domestic demand structure.S 164 Prices and costsS 16ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics4.4 Price-related opinion surveys(seasonally adjusted)         European Commission Business and Consumer Surveys   Purchasing Managers™ Surveys   (percentage balances)   (diffusion indices)            Selling price expectationsConsumer   Input prices
   Prices charged   (for next three months)price trends      over pastManu-Retail tradeServicesConstruction12 monthsManu-ServicesManu-Services
facturingfacturingfacturing123456789
1999-134.8- - -1.8
34.057.756.7
- 49.920122.78.12.1
-12.738.652.755.149.947.9
2013-0.31.7-1.2
-17.129.848.553.849.447.8
2014-0.8-1.41.2
-17.614.349.653.549.748.2
2014 Q3 -0.7-1.80.9
-16.911.751.253.749.848.4
         Q4 -2.1-4.42.8
-15.77.948.752.649.047.1
2015 Q1 -5.5-0.71.4
-17.0-2.445.852.548.847.6
         Q2 -1.13.33.0
-15.4-0.854.754.450.449.0
2015 Mar. -4.60.62.4
-16.3-3.850.754.249.748.6
         Apr. -2.72.82.3
-17.7-2.052.453.650.148.9
         May -0.62.42.6
-13.7-0.656.055.450.049.3
         June 0.04.74.2
-14.90.155.754.151.048.9
         July -0.10.82.1
-14.00.954.454.350.449.5
         Aug. -2.43.12.1
-13.20.349.653.250.549.1
Sources: European Commission (Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs) and Markit.4.5 Labour cost indices(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)      TotalTotal   By component
   For selected economic activitiesMemo item:
(index:Indicator of2012 = 100)Wages andEmployers™ socialBusiness economyMainly non-businessnegotiated
salariescontributions
economywages
 1)1234567
% of total100.0100.074.625.469.330.7 in 2012       
2012100.02.02.02.12.41.32.22013101.41.31.51.01.21.61.82014102.61.21.30.91.21.31.72014 Q3 100.51.41.51.31.31.81.7         Q4 107.91.21.11.31.11.31.72015 Q1 97.62.22.22.12.31.91.4         Q2 . . . . . 
. 1.5Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Experimental data based on non-harmonised sources (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/intro/html/experiment.en.html for further details).S 174 Prices and costsS 17ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics4.6 Unit labour costs, compensation per labour input and labour productivity(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated; quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Unit labour costs TotalTotal
   By economic activity(index:2010Agriculture,Manu-Con-Trade,InformationFinanceRealProfessional,Public ad-Arts, enter-
=100)forestryfacturing,structiontransport,and commu-andestatebusiness andministration,tainment
and fishingenergy and
accom-nicationinsurance
supporteducation,and other
utilitiesmodation andserviceshealth andservices
food servicessocial work12
345
6789
1011122012102.51.92.21.83.8
2.40.00.01.3
3.70.63.1
2013103.81.30.21.80.1
1.00.82.6-1.9
1.21.71.7
2014105.01.2-3.81.80.5
0.71.21.00.5
2.11.31.0
2014 Q2 104.81.1-4.71.80.3
0.90.90.90.2
2.41.11.2
         Q3 105.31.3-4.81.81.2
1.01.00.61.2
2.31.31.1
         Q4 105.51.3-0.72.31.1
0.71.70.90.4
2.11.51.5
2015 Q1 105.81.21.31.72.0
0.50.40.03.5
2.51.60.9
Compensation per employee 2012103.61.50.31.92.3
1.71.51.21.1
2.10.91.9
2013105.31.63.92.81.6
1.00.72.0-0.1
1.11.71.4
2014106.81.4-1.12.31.6
1.22.01.41.0
1.61.31.1
2014 Q2 106.71.3-1.32.11.7
1.11.81.70.9
1.51.21.4
         Q3 107.11.3-0.72.10.6
1.11.91.31.6
1.71.31.0
         Q4 107.61.3-1.12.21.2
1.11.91.80.8
1.51.40.5
2015 Q1 108.21.51.31.90.5
1.21.41.32.9
2.01.61.1
Labour productivity per person employed2012101.1-0.4-1.90.1-1.4
-0.71.51.2-0.2-1.5
0.3-1.1
2013101.40.33.71.01.5
0.1-0.1-0.61.9-0.1
0.0-0.3
2014101.70.32.70.51.1
0.50.80.40.5-0.5
0.00.1
2014 Q2 101.80.23.50.41.3
0.31.00.80.7-0.9
0.00.2
         Q3 101.70.14.30.3-0.6
0.10.90.70.4-0.6
0.0-0.1
         Q4 102.00.0-0.5-0.20.1
0.40.20.90.3-0.5
-0.1-1.1
2015 Q1 102.20.2-0.10.2-1.4
0.70.91.3-0.6-0.5
0.00.2
Compensation per hour worked 2012104.82.92.33.55.1
3.42.01.71.7
3.21.42.9
2013107.22.34.23.03.0
1.81.02.51.4
2.12.22.1
2014108.61.3-0.91.81.3
1.21.91.71.1
1.51.11.3
2014 Q2 108.41.4-0.62.51.7
1.31.72.21.5
1.40.90.9
         Q3 108.81.3-0.61.90.6
1.21.71.71.3
1.41.21.4
         Q4 109.01.1-1.51.60.7
0.91.52.50.3
1.31.10.5
2015 Q1 109.91.61.02.00.4
1.61.12.02.7
2.21.70.6
Hourly labour productivity2012102.30.9-0.91.71.2
0.72.12.00.8-0.4
0.9-0.1
2013103.31.04.11.22.8
0.60.2-0.12.9
0.70.50.5
2014103.50.22.90.00.8
0.50.90.71.0-0.4
-0.20.5
2014 Q2 103.60.44.10.71.4
0.41.01.51.4-0.6
-0.10.3
         Q3 103.40.24.50.1-0.3
0.21.21.41.5-0.5
-0.10.5
         Q4 103.4-0.2-1.6-0.7-0.6
0.30.21.60.0-0.7
-0.3-0.8
2015 Q1 103.90.4-1.20.2-1.3
1.21.31.8-1.1-0.1
0.10.0
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.S 185 Money and creditS 18ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics5.1 Monetary aggregates 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts   M3         M2   M3-M2            M1   M2-M1   CurrencyOvernight
DepositsDeposits
ReposMoneyDebt
indeposits
with anredeemable
marketsecurities
circulationagreedat notice
fundwith
maturityof up to
sharesa maturity
of up to3 months
of up to2 years2 years123456789101112
2012863.44,244.05,107.51,803.32,081.53,884.88,992.3125.0483.1180.6788.79,781.0
2013908.84,482.65,391.41,691.22,123.23,814.49,205.8120.0417.886.5624.39,830.0
2014967.34,949.15,916.41,605.02,129.63,734.59,650.9122.2427.3104.4653.910,304.8
2014 Q3 948.24,745.25,693.41,647.52,136.63,784.19,477.5122.4419.068.8610.210,087.7
         Q4 967.34,949.15,916.41,605.02,129.63,734.59,650.9122.2427.3104.4653.910,304.8
2015 Q1 993.75,173.76,167.41,529.22,133.53,662.79,830.1125.7436.596.9659.110,489.2
         Q2 1,015.05,303.26,318.21,478.82,162.13,640.99,959.091.1438.097.0626.110,585.2
2015 Feb. 992.45,106.66,099.01,535.32,123.33,658.69,757.6132.4443.0108.9684.310,441.9
         Mar. 993.75,173.76,167.41,529.22,133.53,662.79,830.1125.7436.596.9659.110,489.2
         Apr. 1,003.35,189.96,193.21,518.92,151.13,670.09,863.2129.5451.7103.5684.710,547.9
         May 1,006.75,264.96,271.61,486.12,157.23,643.39,914.9111.7442.992.7647.310,562.2
         June 1,015.05,303.26,318.21,478.82,162.13,640.99,959.091.1438.097.0626.110,585.2
         July (p)1,021.15,377.66,398.71,469.82,163.13,632.910,031.5105.7456.290.5652.310,683.9
Transactions201220.0289.5309.5-36.0114.978.9388.5-16.9-20.2-18.5-55.6332.8
201345.3245.8291.1-111.143.9-67.2223.9-12.0-48.8-62.8-123.6100.3
201458.0370.2428.1-91.93.6-88.3339.80.810.712.524.0363.7
2014 Q3 16.7109.1125.7-27.15.1-22.0103.8-8.110.03.45.3109.1
         Q4 19.1125.9145.1-40.9-9.0-50.095.1-0.511.218.429.1124.2
2015 Q1 25.2188.7213.9-63.34.8-58.5155.42.34.9-8.7-1.6153.9
         Q2 21.3151.6172.8-49.115.0-34.1138.7-34.31.51.9-30.9107.9
2015 Feb. 7.647.254.8-19.32.7-16.638.212.84.46.924.162.3
         Mar. 1.359.861.1-8.910.41.562.6-7.0-6.6-13.2-26.835.8
         Apr. 9.637.747.4-8.54.0-4.542.84.115.37.526.969.7
         May 3.470.974.3-34.16.0-28.146.2-18.0-8.8-11.1-37.98.3
         June 8.243.051.2-6.55.0-1.549.7-20.4-4.95.4-19.929.8
         July (p)6.170.576.6-14.11.0-13.163.414.418.2-6.426.289.7
Growth rates20122.47.36.4-1.95.92.14.5-11.6-3.9-9.9-6.63.5
20135.25.85.7-6.22.1-1.72.5-9.5-10.4-37.8-16.21.0
20146.48.27.9-5.40.2-2.33.70.72.618.33.93.7
2014 Q3 6.06.26.2-3.90.3-1.53.09.7-1.1-26.8-4.12.5
         Q4 6.48.27.9-5.40.2-2.33.70.72.618.33.93.7
2015 Q1 7.310.510.0-7.70.3-3.24.65.15.311.05.54.7
         Q2 8.812.311.7-10.80.7-4.35.2-30.96.825.10.54.9
2015 Feb. 7.99.49.1-7.30.0-3.24.10.53.422.14.84.1
         Mar. 7.310.510.0-7.70.3-3.24.65.15.311.05.54.7
         Apr. 8.211.010.5-8.00.5-3.34.96.29.240.011.65.3
         May 8.311.811.2-10.30.7-4.15.0-9.57.715.14.75.0
         June 8.812.311.7-10.80.7-4.35.2-30.96.825.10.54.9
         July (p)8.912.712.1-11.50.8-4.65.4-19.17.925.63.65.3
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.S 195 Money and creditS 19ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics5.2 Deposits in M3 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts          Non-financial corporations 2)    Households 3) FinancialInsuranceOther
corpor-corpor-general
TotalOvernightWith anRedeem-ReposTotalOvernightWith anRedeem-Reposationsationsgovern-
agreedable
agreedable
other thanandment
 4)maturityat notice
maturityat notice
MFIs andpension
of up toof up to
of up toof up to
ICPFs 2)funds2 years3 months
2 years3 months
12345678910111213
20121,618.71,112.8406.988.110.85,308.62,360.4977.31,960.310.5811.2209.1306.3
20131,710.61,198.6400.894.716.55,414.02,542.6875.71,991.24.5801.0192.8298.6
20141,813.61,329.4368.396.519.55,556.92,753.4810.71,989.92.8885.5218.9330.8
2014 Q3 1,789.51,283.8391.199.215.45,531.92,686.9845.11,995.14.9794.8208.4327.1
         Q4 1,813.61,329.4368.396.519.55,556.92,753.4810.71,989.92.8885.5218.9330.8
2015 Q1 1,847.01,392.6340.499.014.95,598.32,843.8761.71,988.83.9952.8225.0339.0
         Q2 1,851.91,407.1320.7111.912.25,649.42,911.5734.72,000.32.8965.7228.6339.6
2015 Feb. 1,851.71,393.7347.197.013.95,566.52,810.2771.11,980.94.3905.4224.4349.6
         Mar. 1,847.01,392.6340.499.014.95,598.32,843.8761.71,988.83.9952.8225.0339.0
         Apr. 1,844.51,387.5333.3112.810.95,611.52,859.2756.71,991.93.7959.3229.8344.3
         May 1,852.01,403.6324.3111.912.25,624.42,878.1745.81,996.73.8966.4230.7346.4
         June 1,851.91,407.1320.7111.912.25,649.42,911.5734.72,000.32.8965.7228.6339.6
         July (p)1,889.11,440.1323.2113.012.85,667.82,945.3721.51,997.83.2980.9233.7344.6
Transactions201272.299.4-33.210.0-4.0222.899.435.6100.2-12.516.515.025.0
201397.990.4-6.07.75.8108.7183.7-100.131.1-6.0-17.4-14.2-8.5
201468.690.2-25.41.42.5140.4209.1-65.6-1.4-1.746.46.320.9
2014 Q3 29.633.6-5.71.9-0.247.361.9-16.01.00.4-8.3-2.312.6
         Q4 7.116.3-12.1-1.24.026.067.7-33.0-6.6-2.056.4-8.2-5.7
2015 Q1 29.649.1-17.22.5-4.939.181.4-43.3-0.11.150.54.68.6
         Q2 8.829.4-19.01.0-2.652.971.6-27.29.6-1.116.93.90.7
2015 Feb. 11.713.5-5.00.82.512.123.4-12.71.00.418.3-4.65.8
         Mar. -9.0-3.9-8.02.00.930.732.8-9.98.2-0.443.00.3-10.7
         Apr. 1.610.0-6.31.9-3.914.918.9-5.01.3-0.310.25.15.4
         May 5.214.4-9.5-0.91.212.018.3-11.24.70.24.80.72.0
         June 2.05.0-3.20.00.125.934.4-11.13.6-1.11.8-1.9-6.7
         July (p)33.331.40.31.10.517.633.2-13.6-2.40.413.04.83.2
Growth rates20124.79.8-7.513.2-25.24.44.43.85.4-54.22.17.89.1
20136.18.1-1.58.854.62.07.8-10.31.6-57.0-2.2-6.9-2.8
20144.07.5-6.31.514.52.68.2-7.5-0.1-37.25.53.47.0
2014 Q3 6.08.6-2.13.447.42.27.3-7.00.1-20.8-0.92.33.3
         Q4 4.07.5-6.31.514.52.68.2-7.5-0.1-37.25.53.47.0
2015 Q1 4.69.5-10.03.6-5.72.89.7-11.20.1-31.014.6-0.85.2
         Q2 4.210.1-14.14.5-23.33.010.8-13.90.2-38.013.7-1.35.1
2015 Feb. 4.89.9-8.91.3-21.92.58.9-10.3-0.2-25.57.9-0.98.0
         Mar. 4.69.5-10.03.6-5.72.89.7-11.20.1-31.014.6-0.85.2
         Apr. 4.49.9-11.45.5-37.82.910.0-11.40.1-35.315.61.57.5
         May 4.410.4-13.94.5-24.12.910.2-12.70.2-25.313.41.88.5
         June 4.210.1-14.14.5-23.33.010.8-13.90.2-38.013.7-1.35.1
         July (p)5.511.7-14.34.6-11.13.111.2-15.10.2-35.414.4-1.64.9
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).3) Including non-profit institutions serving households.
4) Refers to the general government sector excluding central government.S 205 Money and creditS 20ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics5.3 Credit to euro area residents 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts         Credit to general government   Credit to other euro area residentsTotalLoansDebtTotal
   LoansDebtEquity and
securities   securitiesnon-money
   TotalTo non-To house-To financialTo insurance
market fundfinancialholds
 4)corporationscorporations
investmentAdjusted forcorpor-
other thanand pension
fund sharesloan salesations
 3)MFIs andfunds
and securi-ICPFs 3)tisation 2)12345
678
91011
1220123,410.81,169.32,241.513,069.510,860.0
- 4,544.65,242.3984.389.01,435.9773.6
20133,407.51,096.32,311.212,709.410,546.4
- 4,354.15,221.4872.698.31,363.9799.1
20143,609.71,131.72,478.012,562.510,512.2
- 4,280.35,199.3904.6128.11,276.5773.8
2014 Q3 3,508.91,102.22,406.712,561.810,444.8
- 4,288.15,194.6858.8103.31,307.0810.1
         Q4 3,609.71,131.72,478.012,562.510,512.2
- 4,280.35,199.3904.6128.11,276.5773.8
2015 Q1 3,674.01,153.42,520.612,674.310,613.9
- 4,310.15,233.7935.5134.61,273.1787.3
         Q2 3,684.81,137.62,547.112,624.510,590.4
- 4,291.75,257.2905.0136.51,243.7790.3
2015 Feb. 3,638.71,146.72,492.012,650.510,588.3
- 4,312.85,221.0917.4137.11,272.9789.3
         Mar. 3,674.01,153.42,520.612,674.310,613.9
- 4,310.15,233.7935.5134.61,273.1787.3
         Apr. 3,702.31,151.62,550.712,654.010,610.4
- 4,303.95,236.3933.1137.11,262.0781.7
         May 3,698.41,144.02,554.412,659.410,611.2
- 4,300.45,243.4923.2144.21,257.2791.0
         June 3,684.81,137.62,547.112,624.510,590.4
- 4,291.75,257.2905.0136.51,243.7790.3
         July (p)3,727.51,132.72,594.812,712.510,608.6
- 4,300.05,260.5916.7131.51,297.4806.5
Transactions2012185.0-4.0189.0-100.6-69.1-13.4-107.626.014.5-2.0-69.938.5
2013-24.4-73.649.2-304.5-247.4-221.2-132.8-3.5-120.79.6-71.714.6
201473.616.357.3-106.8-50.719.2-58.3-15.011.011.6-90.033.9
2014 Q3 40.4-1.441.8-18.7-10.3-10.6-18.48.2-4.44.2-14.15.7
         Q4 47.512.834.71.722.833.64.35.16.86.6-36.715.6
2015 Q1 38.521.517.034.645.852.98.320.111.56.0-4.0-7.2
         Q2 59.8-15.475.2-13.14.022.31.229.7-28.92.0-24.37.1
2015 Feb. -20.12.7-22.810.68.315.510.31.4-1.5-1.9-5.78.0
         Mar. 27.25.421.914.021.520.9-3.012.914.2-2.6-1.1-6.4
         Apr. 39.3-1.540.8-1.912.523.12.27.10.62.7-8.9-5.6
         May 8.9-7.816.71.2-1.76.6-4.86.9-10.97.0-4.97.8
         June 11.6-6.017.6-12.4-6.8-7.43.815.7-18.7-7.7-10.54.9
         July (p)31.6-5.036.777.221.235.99.74.512.1-5.044.911.0
Growth rates20125.8-0.39.5-0.8-0.6-0.1-2.30.51.5-2.2-4.65.2
2013-0.7-6.32.2-2.3-2.3-2.0-2.9-0.1-12.210.8-5.01.9
20142.11.52.4-0.8-0.50.2-1.3-0.31.111.8-6.64.2
2014 Q3 -0.5-0.7-0.4-1.9-1.2-0.6-2.0-0.5-2.58.5-8.51.8
         Q4 2.11.52.4-0.8-0.50.2-1.3-0.31.111.8-6.64.2
2015 Q1 2.82.03.2-0.30.10.8-0.60.02.314.1-5.02.9
         Q2 5.31.67.10.00.60.9-0.11.2-1.917.8-6.02.6
2015 Feb. 1.91.52.1-0.5-0.10.6-0.6-0.20.515.4-5.64.0
         Mar. 2.82.03.2-0.30.10.8-0.60.02.314.1-5.02.9
         Apr. 3.92.44.70.00.10.9-0.40.00.317.2-2.52.7
         May 4.10.95.60.20.61.0-0.21.0-0.927.0-5.43.7
         June 5.31.67.10.00.60.9-0.11.2-1.917.8-6.02.6
         July (p)5.80.88.10.70.91.40.41.30.410.1-2.83.0
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Adjusted for the derecognition of loans on the MFI balance sheet on account of their sale or securitisation.
3) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).4) Including non-profit institutions serving households.S 215 Money and creditS 21ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics5.4 MFI loans to euro area non-financial corporations and households 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts         Non-financial corporations 2)    Households 3)         TotalUp to 1 yearOver 1Over 5 years   Total
Loans forLoans forOther loans
and up toconsumptionhouse
Adjusted for5 yearsAdjusted forpurchaseloan salesloan salesand securi-and securi-tisation 4)tisation 4)1234567891
020124,544.6- 1,127.9795.62,621.05,242.3
- 602.03,823.6816.7
20134,354.1- 1,065.6740.82,547.85,221.4
- 573.53,851.5796.4
20144,280.3- 1,081.2725.12,474.05,199.3
- 563.33,860.1776.0
2014 Q3 4,288.1- 1,056.5726.12,505.45,194.6
- 567.13,843.7783.8
         Q4 4,280.3- 1,081.2725.12,474.05,199.3
- 563.33,860.1776.0
2015 Q1 4,310.1- 1,089.9738.92,481.35,233.7
- 567.93,890.4775.4
         Q2 4,291.7- 1,084.5744.42,462.85,257.2
- 578.53,907.6771.1
2015 Feb. 4,312.8- 1,090.4734.72,487.75,221.0
- 565.23,882.2773.6
         Mar. 4,310.1- 1,089.9738.92,481.35,233.7
- 567.93,890.4775.4
         Apr. 4,303.9- 1,090.4738.02,475.55,236.3
- 566.93,894.8774.6
         May 4,300.4- 1,085.2742.72,472.55,243.4
- 568.33,901.7773.4
         June 4,291.7- 1,084.5744.42,462.85,257.2
- 578.53,907.6771.1
         July (p)4,300.0- 1,086.9744.72,468.35,260.5
- 578.73,911.7770.1
Transactions2012-107.6-60.36.2-51.4-62.326.034.7-17.748.8-5.1
2013-132.8-127.5-44.5-44.5-43.7-3.514.3-18.127.6-13.1
2014-58.3-45.0-13.6
1.6-46.2-15.041.2-3.0-3.2-8.8
2014 Q3 -18.4-19.9-3.1-6.8-8.48.29.6
1.213.1-6.1
         Q4 4.36.8-7.3
8.53.05.113.9-2.29.3-2.1
2015 Q1 8.311.2-0.7
7.31.820.124.2
2.217.90.0
         Q2 1.210.7-0.111.6-10.229.738.7
9.121.7-1.2
2015 Feb. 10.312.43.1-1.18.41.46.4-0.73.8-1.7
         Mar. -3.0-2.0-1.8
3.7-4.912.911.6
2.97.52.4
         Apr. 2.24.23.7
0.7-2.27.115.4-0.77.50.3
         May -4.81.1-6.2
4.3-2.86.99.2
1.76.4-1.1
         June 3.85.42.5
6.5-5.215.714.0
8.27.8-0.3
         July (p)9.714.62.1
0.37.24.514.0
0.84.4-0.7
Growth rates2012-2.3-1.30.5-6.0-2.30.50.7-2.81.3-0.6
2013-2.9-2.8-4.0-5.6-1.7-0.10.3-3.00.7-1.6
2014-1.3-1.0-1.3
0.2-1.8-0.30.8-0.5-0.1-1.1
2014 Q3 -2.0-1.8-1.4-3.3-1.9-0.50.5-1.1-0.2-1.7
         Q4 -1.3-1.0-1.3
0.2-1.8-0.30.8-0.5-0.1-1.1
2015 Q1 -0.6-0.2-0.7
2.1-1.20.01.1-0.10.2-1.1
         Q2 -0.10.2-1.1
2.8-0.61.21.7
1.81.6-1.2
2015 Feb. -0.6-0.30.5
0.8-1.5-0.20.9-0.50.0-1.1
         Mar. -0.6-0.2-0.7
2.1-1.20.01.1-0.10.2-1.1
         Apr. -0.40.00.4
1.4-1.20.01.3-0.10.2-0.7
         May -0.20.20.4
2.4-1.21.01.5
0.51.4-1.0
         June -0.10.2-1.1
2.8-0.61.21.7
1.81.6-1.2
         July (p)0.40.9-0.2
3.1-0.21.31.9
1.81.6-0.5
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).3) Including non-profit institutions serving households.
4) Adjusted for the derecognition of loans on the MFI balance sheet on account of their sale or securitisation.S 225 Money and creditS 22ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics5.5 Counterparts to M3 other than credit to euro area residents 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts         MFI liabilities   MFI assets      Central   Longer-term financial liabilities vis-à-vis other euro area residentsNet external
   Othergovernmentassets   holdings 2)TotalDepositsDepositsDebtCapital
   Totalwith anredeemablesecuritiesand reserves
agreedat noticewith a
ReposReverse
maturityof overmaturity
with centralrepos to
of over3 monthsof over
counter-central
2 years2 yearsparties 3)counter-parties 3)1234567891
02012305.47,578.12,395.9106.02,680.82,395.41,029.8154.4260.8201.2
2013260.27,311.02,373.391.52,506.32,340.01,153.9130.6183.8122.1
2014262.07,175.52,253.592.22,375.12,454.61,388.8181.2185.3139.8
2014 Q3 249.77,336.12,278.692.42,457.02,507.91,419.3183.5163.6121.7
         Q4 262.07,175.52,253.592.22,375.12,454.61,388.8181.2185.3139.8
2015 Q1 287.67,314.02,259.890.52,394.82,568.81,511.5230.9234.8159.1
         Q2 265.17,155.82,219.986.52,331.52,517.91,457.0239.8224.5143.7
2015 Feb. 263.07,292.92,263.391.82,396.32,541.51,450.8257.8226.3144.5
         Mar. 287.67,314.02,259.890.52,394.82,568.81,511.5230.9234.8159.1
         Apr. 260.37,227.82,238.288.72,355.32,545.61,450.6229.0209.3132.1
         May 275.97,220.52,232.787.42,343.22,557.21,467.0233.7222.9140.7
         June 265.17,155.82,219.986.52,331.52,517.91,457.0239.8224.5143.7
         July (p)248.17,148.22,228.985.72,316.02,517.51,391.7248.5202.2137.4
Transactions2012-4.9-112.8-156.3-10.2-106.4160.199.531.39.441.5
2013-46.0-90.8-18.6-14.3-137.679.7359.2-66.632.243.9
2014-6.9-162.4-120.12.1-154.9110.5246.0-18.31.517.7
2014 Q3 -20.9-1.8-28.42.3-28.552.738.426.4-7.72.6
         Q4 4.5-94.1-25.51.2-77.47.537.8-52.421.718.1
2015 Q1 22.4-50.8-31.1-2.8-47.230.33.648.849.419.3
         Q2 -22.5-80.8-39.3-4.0-48.310.8-8.1-34.0-10.3-15.4
2015 Feb. -43.1-17.5-8.6-1.0-12.14.2-21.132.323.011.3
         Mar. 24.6-15.2-6.0-1.3-22.714.828.8-24.88.414.6
         Apr. -27.3-38.1-19.2-1.8-18.91.8-30.3-2.7-25.4-27.0
         May 15.6-17.7-6.9-1.3-23.914.44.3-8.113.68.6
         June -10.8-25.0-13.2-0.9-5.5-5.417.9-23.21.63.1
         July (p)-17.0-6.212.7-0.7-21.53.4-55.112.7-22.3-6.4
Growth rates2012-1.5-1.5-6.1-8.8-3.87.1
- - 2.526.1
2013-15.1-1.2-0.8-13.5-5.13.4
- - 10.323.5
2014-2.7-2.2-5.12.3-6.14.6
- - 0.814.5
2014 Q3 -11.5-1.1-4.7-1.2-2.74.2
- - -17.5-3.2
         Q4 -2.7-2.2-5.12.3-6.14.6
- - 0.814.5
2015 Q1 5.7-2.9-5.9-0.3-6.83.9
- - 32.536.3
         Q2 -6.0-3.1-5.4-3.7-8.14.1
- - 31.020.7
2015 Feb. -4.3-2.5-5.80.9-5.94.2
- - 27.028.4
         Mar. 5.7-2.9-5.9-0.3-6.83.9
- - 32.536.3
         Apr. -5.6-3.1-5.5-2.3-7.33.3
- - 28.633.0
         May -2.5-3.2-5.3-3.8-8.44.2
- - 51.451.4
         June -6.0-3.1-5.4-3.7-8.14.1
- - 31.020.7
         July (p)-12.7-3.1-4.4-5.1-8.53.5
- - 19.013.6
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Comprises central government holdings of deposits with the MFI sector and of securities issued by the MFI sector.
3) Not adjusted for seasonal effects.S 236 Fiscal developmentsS 23ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics6.1 Deficit/surplus(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)   Deficit (-)/surplus (+)Memo item:PrimaryTotalCentralStateLocalSocualdeficit (-)/governmentgovernmentgovernment
securitysurplus (+)funds123456
2011-4.1-3.3-0.7-0.20.0-1.22012-3.6-3.4-0.30.00.0-0.62013-2.9-2.5-0.20.0-0.1-0.12014-2.4-2.1-0.20.0-0.10.22014 Q2 -2.6. . . . 0.1
         Q3 -2.4. . . . 0.3
         Q4 -2.4. . . . 0.2
2015 Q1 -2.4. . . . 0.2
Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.6.2 Revenue and expenditure(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)         Revenue   Expenditure      Total   Current revenueCapitalTotal
   Current expenditureCapitalrevenueexpenditureDirectIndirectNet social
Compen-IntermediateInterestSocial
taxestaxescontributions
sation ofconsumption
benefitsemployees1234
56789
1011
1213201144.844.411.712.615.10.449.044.710.4
5.33.022.2
4.3201245.945.512.212.915.30.449.545.110.4
5.33.022.6
4.4201346.646.112.512.915.50.549.445.410.4
5.32.822.9
4.0201446.746.212.513.115.50.549.145.410.3
5.32.623.1
3.72014 Q2 46.746.212.513.015.50.549.345.410.3
5.32.723.0
3.9         Q3 46.646.212.513.115.50.549.145.310.3
5.32.723.0
3.7         Q4 46.746.212.513.115.50.549.145.410.3
5.32.623.1
3.72015 Q1 46.646.212.513.115.50.549.045.310.3
5.32.523.1
3.7Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.6.3 Government debt-to-GDP ratio(as a percentage of GDP; outstanding amounts at end of period)               Total   Financial instrument
   Holder   Original maturity   Residual maturity
   CurrencyCurrencyLoansDebt   Resident creditorsNon-residentUp toOverUp toOver 1OverEuro orOther
andsecurities
creditors1 year1 year1 yearand up to5 yearsparticipatingcurren-
depositsMFIs5 yearscurrenciescies
123456
789101112
1314
201185.82.915.367.542.724.343.112.273.620.329.835.784.01.8
201289.13.017.268.845.426.243.611.477.719.531.638.086.92.2
201390.92.717.071.245.926.145.010.480.519.432.239.389.02.0
201492.02.716.872.445.225.946.810.181.819.232.240.589.92.0
2014 Q2 92.72.716.773.4. . . . . . . . . . 
         Q3 92.12.616.772.8. . . . . . . . . . 
         Q4 92.02.716.972.4. . . . . . . . . . 
2015 Q1 92.92.716.773.5. . . . . . . . . . 
Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.S 246 Fiscal developmentsS 24ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics6.4 Annual change in the government debt-to-GDP ratio and underlying factors 1)(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)Change inPrimary
   Deficit-debt adjustmentInterest-Memo item:
debt-to-deficit (+)/
   growthBorrowing
GDP ratio 2)surplus (-)Total   Transactions in main financial assetsRevaluationOtherdifferentialrequirement
effectsTotalCurrencyLoansDebtEquity andand other
andsecuritiesinvestmentchanges in
depositsfund sharesvolume
123456
78910
111220112.11.20.1-0.30.2-0.2-0.2-0.10.40.1
0.83.920123.30.60.11.10.30.3-0.10.5-1.30.3
2.75.020131.80.1-0.2-0.6-0.4-0.4-0.10.30.00.4
2.02.720141.1-0.20.20.00.2-0.1-0.20.1-0.10.2
1.12.72014 Q2 0.9-0.1-0.2-0.10.00.0-0.20.1-0.20.1
1.32.6         Q3 1.0-0.30.00.00.00.0-0.20.2-0.30.3
1.22.7         Q4 1.1-0.20.20.20.20.0-0.20.1-0.10.1
1.12.72015 Q1 0.9-0.20.10.20.4-0.1-0.20.1-0.20.1
1.02.7Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.1) Intergovernmental lending in the context of the financial crisis is consolidated except in quarterly data on the deficit-debt adjustment.2) Calculated as the difference between the government debt-to-GDP ratios at the end of the reference period and a year earlier.6.5 Government debt securities 1)(debt service as a percentage of GDP; flows during debt service period; average nominal yields in percentages per annum)   Debt service due within 1 year 2) Average   Average nominal yields 4)      residual      Total   Principal
   Interestmaturity   Outstanding amounts   Transactionsin years 3)MaturitiesMaturitiesTotalFloatingZero   Fixed rateIssuanceRedemption
of up to 3of up to 3ratecoupon
monthsmonthsMaturitiesof up to 1year12
34
5678910111213
201216.314.24.92.10.5
6.33.81.71.14.03.11.62.2
201316.514.45.02.10.5
6.33.51.71.33.72.81.21.8
201415.913.95.12.00.5
6.43.11.50.53.52.70.81.6
2014 Q2 16.614.55.42.10.5
6.43.31.60.73.62.71.11.6
         Q3 17.315.25.72.10.5
6.43.21.50.53.52.80.91.6
         Q4 15.913.95.12.00.5
6.43.11.50.53.52.70.81.6
2015 Q1 15.513.44.62.00.5
6.53.01.40.03.42.80.61.7
2015 Feb. 15.713.64.52.00.5
6.53.01.40.33.42.70.71.7
         Mar. 15.513.44.62.00.5
6.53.01.40.03.42.80.61.7
         Apr. 15.913.94.82.00.5
6.62.91.30.33.42.80.51.7
         May 16.013.95.12.00.5
6.62.91.3-0.23.42.80.41.6
         June 15.413.44.92.00.5
6.62.91.20.13.42.80.31.4
         July 15.313.34.32.00.5
6.62.81.2-0.33.42.80.31.5
Source: ECB.
1) At face value and not consolidated within the general government sector.
2) Excludes future payments on debt securities not yet outstanding and early redemptions.
3) Residual maturity at the end of the period.
4) Outstanding amounts at the end of the period; transactions as 12-month average.S 256 Fiscal developmentsS 25ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6 / 2015 - Statistics6.6 Fiscal developments in euro area countries(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period and outstanding amounts at end of period)Government deficit (-)/surplus (+)BelgiumGermanyEstoniaIrelandGreeceSpainFrance
ItalyCyprus
123456789
2011-4.1-0.91.2-12.7-10.2
-9.4-5.1-3.5-5.8
2012-4.10.1-0.2-8.1-8.7-10.3
-4.8-3.0-5.8
2013-2.90.1-0.2-5.8-12.3
-6.8-4.1-2.9-4.9
2014-3.20.70.6-4.1-3.5-5.8-4.0-3.0-8.8
2014 Q2 -3.30.3-0.3-5.1-3.0-6.2-3.9-2.9-11.9
         Q3 -3.10.5-0.2-4.6-2.3-5.7-4.0-2.8-10.2
         Q4 -3.20.60.6-4.0-3.5-5.8-4.0-3.0-8.8
2015 Q1 -3.50.70.4-3.9-4.6-5.8-3.9-2.9-0.2
Government debt2011102.077.96.0111.2171.3
69.285.2116.466.0
2012103.879.39.7121.7156.9
84.489.6123.179.5
2013104.477.110.1123.2175.0
92.192.3128.5102.2
2014106.574.710.6109.7177.1
97.795.0132.1107.5
2014 Q2 108.975.810.5114.5177.4
96.495.5134.1109.8
         Q3 108.375.310.5112.6175.8
96.895.7132.0104.7
         Q4 106.674.910.6107.6177.1
97.795.6132.1107.5
2015 Q1 111.174.410.5104.8168.8
98.097.5135.1106.8
Government deficit (-)/surplus (+)LatviaLithuaniaLuxembourgMaltaNetherlandsAustriaPortugalSloveniaSlovakiaFinland
10111213141516171819
2011-3.3-8.9
0.4-2.6-4.3-2.6-7.4-6.6-4.1-1.0
2012-0.8-3.1
0.1-3.6-4.0-2.2-5.6-4.0-4.2-2.1
2013-0.7-2.6
0.9-2.6-2.3-1.3-4.8-14.9-2.6-2.5
2014-1.4-0.7
0.6-2.1-2.3-2.4-4.5-4.9-2.9-3.2
2014 Q2 -0.3-1.3
1.3-3.4-3.0-1.2-4.6-12.8-2.6-2.7
         Q3 0.0-0.7
0.7-2.8-2.8-0.4-4.4-12.8-2.8-2.8
         Q4 -1.4-0.7
0.6-2.1-2.4-2.4-4.5-4.9-2.9-3.1
2015 Q1 -1.9-0.8
0.3-2.5-2.0-1.9-4.4-4.6-2.8-3.0
Government debt201142.737.219.169.761.382.1111.146.543.448.5
201240.939.821.967.466.581.5125.853.752.152.9
201338.238.824.069.268.680.9129.770.354.655.8
201440.040.923.668.068.884.5130.280.953.659.3
2014 Q2 41.038.622.474.868.682.2130.878.255.758.5
         Q3 40.438.122.172.268.080.7132.277.755.457.8
         Q4 40.040.822.168.567.984.4130.280.953.659.3
2015 Q1 35.038.121.670.368.984.7129.681.954.060.3
Source: Eurostat.© European Central BankPostal address 60640 Frankfurt am Main, GermanyTelephone
 +49 69 1344 0Website
 www.ecb.europa.eu
This Bulletin was produced under the responsibility of the Executive Board of the ECB. Translations are prepared and published by 
the national central banks.All rights reserved. Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. The cut-off date for the statistics included in this issue was 2 September 2015.

ISSN 2363-3417 (epub)ISSN 2363-3417 (online)EU catalogue No QB-BP-15-006-EN-E (epub)EU catalogue No QB-BP-15-006-EN-N (online)