Economic Bulletin Issue 7 / 2015
2Contents  
Update on economic and monetary developmentsSummary 31 External environment 52 Financial developments 73 Economic activity 84 Prices and costs 105 Money and credit 12  Boxes1 Trade links between the euro area and
 China 162  Explaining the drivers of the recent increase in oil price volatility
 203  An assessment of recent euro area consumption growth 234  New data on loans to the private sector adjusted for sales 
 and securitisation 255  The creation of a European Fiscal Board 28  A
rticles1  The transmission of the ECB™s recent non-standard monetary 
 policy measures 322  The short-term fiscal implications of structural reforms 523  
European statistics: cooperation between the European System 
 of Central Banks and the European Statistical System 71  Statistics S13Update on economic and monetary  developments SummaryGlobal economic activity remained moderate in the third quarter of 2015, with substantial divergence across major economies. Growth momentum in the United States and the United Kingdom appeared to slow, following a strengthening 
in activity in the second quarter, while momentum in Japan remained relatively 
subdued. In China, data for the third quarter remain consistent with a gradual slowdown in the economy. In emerging market economies, the past fall in commodity 
prices has led to a divergence in growth between commodity-importing and commodity-exporting countries. Global trade remains weak, while global headline 
inflation has stabilised at low levels in recent months.Euro area financial markets have continued to show some volatility. Government 
bond yields have declined significantly across all euro area countries, with the  ten-year GDP-weighted euro area sovereign bond yield falling by around 30 basis 
points from the beginning of September to 1.16% on 21 October. Stock market 
prices in the euro area were around 2% higher at the end of this period, despite recording significant price movements and temporarily falling by around 6%. The 

effective exchange rate of the euro remained broadly stable.
In spite of a less supportive external environment, the euro area economic recovery is proceeding, increasingly supported by domestic factors, in particular private consumption. Real GDP rose by 0.4% quarter on quarter in the second quarter of 
2015, following a rise of 0.5% in the previous quarter. The most recent indicators 
point to a broadly similar pace of growth in the third quarter. Looking ahead, the 
economic recovery is expected to continue, albeit dampened by weaker than expected foreign demand. Domestic demand should be further supported by the ECB™s monetary policy measures and their favourable impact on financial conditions, 

as well as by the progress made with fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. Moreover, the decline in oil prices should bolster households™ real disposable income 
and corporate profitability, thus supporting private consumption and investment. 
However, the risks to the euro area growth outlook remain on the downside, 
reflecting in particular the heightened uncertainties regarding developments in emerging market economies, which have the potential to further weigh on global growth and foreign demand for euro area exports. The increased uncertainty that has 

recently manifested itself in financial market developments may also have negative repercussions for euro area domestic demand.Reflecting declining energy prices, headline inflation dipped back into negative territory in September, standing at -0.1%, while HICP inflation excluding energy 
remained stable at 0.9%. On the basis of the available information and current oil futures prices, annual HICP inflation is expected to remain very low in the near term, 
but rise at the turn of the year, mainly on account of base effects linked to the fall 
4in oil prices in late 2014. Inflation rates are foreseen to pick up further during 2016 and 2017, supported by the expected economic recovery, the pass-through of past 
declines in the euro exchange rate and the assumption embedded in oil futures markets of somewhat higher oil prices in the years ahead. However, there are risks 
stemming from the economic outlook and from financial and commodity market developments which could further slow down the gradual increase in inflation rates towards levels closer to 2%. Despite some moderation, broad money growth remained robust in August and 
continued to be driven by its most liquid components. Domestic sources of money creation were again of increasing importance, partly as a result of the ECB™s non-

standard monetary policy measures. Ongoing shifts away from longer-term financial liabilities and increased credit flows were visible, with the latter reflecting the impact of the expanded asset purchase programme (APP). Meanwhile, loan dynamics remained on a path of gradual recovery, despite being hampered in some countries. 
Bank lending rates for non-financial corporations declined further in August, with the 

ECB™s non-standard measures making a notable contribution to this improvement. 
Moreover, the October 2015 euro area bank lending survey suggests that changes 
in credit standards and loan demand are continuing to support a recovery in loan growth. At its meeting on 22 October 2015, based on its regular economic and monetary 
analyses and in line with its forward guidance, the Governing Council decided to 
keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. As regards non-standard monetary 
policy measures, the asset purchases are proceeding smoothly and continue to have 
a favourable impact on the cost and availability of credit for firms and households. 

The Governing Council stressed that the strength and persistence of the factors that 
are currently slowing the return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2%
 in the 
medium term require thorough analysis. The risks to inflation outlook are being closely 
monitored by the Governing Council. In this context, the degree of monetary policy 
accommodation will be re-examined at the December monetary policy meeting, when 
the new Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections will be available. The Governing 
Council emphasised that it is willing and able to act by using all the instruments 

available within its mandate if warranted in order to maintain an appropriate degree 
of monetary accommodation. In particular, it recalled that the APP provides sufficient 
flexibility in terms of adjusting its size, composition and duration, and said that, in 
the meantime, the monthly asset purchases of •60 billion will continue to be fully 
implemented. These purchases are intended to run until the end of September 2016, 

or beyond, if necessary, and, in any case, until the Governing Council sees a sustained 
adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with the ECB™s aim of achieving 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
51 External environment 
Global indicators suggest that world real GDP growth remained moderate in 
the third quarter of 2015, with substantial divergence across major economies. The global composite output Purchasing Managers™ Index (PMI) excluding the 
euro area fell slightly in the third quarter and remained below its long-term average (see Chart 1), pointing to continued moderate GDP growth. Developments diverged 
somewhat across advanced economies, although quarterly composite output PMIs in the United States, United Kingdom and Japan remained close to or above their long-term averages. Meanwhile, PMIs in the emerging market economies (EMEs) 
continued to weigh on the global index, with notable weakness in the quarterly output PMI in Brazil in the third quarter. 
Global trade remains weak. For the first time since 2009 global trade growth turned negative in the first half of 2015. In the third quarter the volume of world merchandise imports stabilised in July 2015, with flat growth on a three-month-on-three-month basis, up from -0.5% in June. The global trade outlook remains weak, 
however, as suggested by the further decline in the global PMI for new export 

orders in September, with the index remaining below the threshold of 50 for the third 
consecutive month.Global headline inflation has stabilised at a low level in recent months. Annual inflation in OECD countries has remained unchanged at 0.6% since May 2015. Excluding food and energy, annual inflation in OECD countries also remained stable 
at 1.7% in August. Among major non-OECD economies, inflation fell in China and 
Brazil, while it increased marginally in Russia. In Russia 
and Brazil, inflation is still high, reflecting the upward impact of currency depreciation on import prices. Growth in US activity appears to have softened in the third quarter of 2015, following a strong 
rebound in the second quarter.
 Real GDP was 
robust in the second quarter, growing by 1.0% quarter 
on quarter (up from 0.2% in the previous quarter). Consumption expenditure continued to be the main engine of growth and is expected to remain strong, supported by rising real incomes, reduced debt service burdens, low interest rates and declining gasoline 
prices. Meanwhile, weakness in the manufacturing sector appears to have intensified recently, as indicated 
by the decline in the Institute of Supply Management manufacturing index over the past three months. In addition, recent trade data suggest that net exports 
could act as a drag on activity in the third quarter, 
against the background of a strong US dollar and relatively weak foreign demand. The labour market 
continued to improve, but at a slower pace than earlier this year. Inflation remained at low levels, with annual 
Chart 1Global composite output PMI(diffusion index; deviations from long-term average)
-10-8-6
-4
-20
246WorldexcludingEAEAUSJPUKCNINRUBRQ1 2015Q2 2015 Q3 2015 Sources: Markit and ECB calculations.Notes: Long-term averages refer to the period from 1999 or, if the data start later, from 



Japan, November 2005 for China, December 2005 for India, October 2001 for Russia 
and March 2007 for Brazil. 6headline CPI inflation flat in September. Excluding food and energy, inflation edged 
up slightly to 1.9%, reflecting an increase in services inflation. In Japan, momentum in the economy remained relatively subdued, following a decline in economic activity in the second quarter of this year. 
Real GDP fell in 
the second quarter (-0.3% quarter on quarter), partly because of temporary factors such as adverse weather conditions, but also as a result of substantial weakness in private consumption and foreign demand. Available monthly indicators for the third 
quarter paint a mixed picture. Although the increase in the synthetic consumption 
index in August suggests a rebound in consumer spending, consumer sentiment 
remains fragile. Meanwhile, private sector core machinery orders Œ a leading 
indicator for business investment spending Œ fell considerably in July and August. 
Annual headline CPI inflation remained low in August, but annual inflation excluding 
food and energy continued its gradual upward trend.The UK economy is heading towards a moderate slowdown in the second half of the year. 
In the second quarter of 2015 real GDP growth rebounded, growing 
by 0.7% quarter on quarter. Domestic demand continued to support growth, as low 
energy prices provided a temporary lift to real disposable income and consumption, 
while net exports made a significant positive contribution to growth in the second quarter of 2015. Short-term indicators, in particular the PMI survey data for services, are trending downwards, suggesting a slowdown in economic growth. The 
unemployment rate edged down to 5.4% in the three months to August 2015, while 
earnings growth stabilised at around 3%. Annual headline CPI inflation continues 
to remain close to zero on the back of low energy and food prices, while inflation excluding food and energy averaged around 1% in the third quarter of 2015.In China, recent data overall remain consistent with 

a gradual slowdown of the economy. 
Real GDP 

grew by 1.8% quarter on quarter in the third quarter of 
2015, unchanged from the previous quarter. While some 
indicators Œ particularly those associated with heavy 
industries and construction Œ have clearly retreated in 
recent quarters, the structural changes underway in the 
economy Œ away from heavy industries and towards 
services and consumption Œ together with the greater 

resilience of the other sectors, suggest that, overall, 
available data remain consistent with an economy 
undergoing a gradual slowdown. Activity is supported by 
past monetary and fiscal stimulus working its way through 
the economy, thus buffering the Chinese economy from 

a sharper slowdown. Meanwhile price pressures remain 
subdued. Box 1 reviews the role of China in global trade 
and the trade linkages with the euro area. 
Growth momentum remains weak and 
heterogeneous across other EMEs. EMEs are 
suffering from a constellation of shocks, including the 
sharp fall in commodity prices, tightening external 
Chart 2GDP growth in EMEs
(year-on-year percentage changes)-10-50510
1520072008200920102011201220132014EME aggregatecommodity exporting economiescommodity importing economiesSources: National sources and Haver Analytics.
Notes: The latest observation refers to the second quarter of 2015. Lines are 

GDP-weighted averages of GDP growth in EMEs. Range shows 10-90% percentile 

of growth across 23 EMEs. Commodity-importing economies: Hong Kong, India, 
Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Mexico, Poland, Czech 
Republic, Hungary; commodity-exporting countries: Russia, South Africa, Saudi Arabia, 
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Indonesia and Venezuela.
7financing conditions and the slowdown in China.
 The past fall in commodity prices has 
led to a divergence in growth between commodity-importing and commodity-exporting 
economies (see Chart 2). Activity has remained resilient in commodity-importing 
countries (including India, Turkey and non-euro area central and eastern European 
countries), while it continued to slide in commodity-exporting countries. This 
slowdown was particularly sharp in two large commodity-exporting countries Œ Russia 
and Brazil Œ where recessions intensified in the second quarter of 2015. 
Following a renewed decline over the summer, oil prices broadly stabilised 
during September and October, reflecting early signs of a moderation in 
the supply overhang. On the supply side, OPEC maintained its production near 

record rates, led by Saudi Arabia and Iraq, although the deceleration in production 
growth continued. At the same time, lower prices and reduced investment seem to 
have triggered a gradual fall in US shale oil production. On the demand side, global 
oil demand growth stayed above trend Œ stimulated by low oil prices Œ although 
generally it remained too weak to keep up with the pace of oil supply growth. Box 2 

looks at the drivers of the recent increase in oil price volatility. Non-oil commodity 
prices have remained broadly unchanged over the past two months.2 Financial developments
Over the review period from 2 September to 21 October 2015 government bond yields declined significantly across the euro area. The GDP-weighted 
 ten-year euro area sovereign bond yield declined by around 30 basis points and 
stood at 1.16% at the end of the review period (see Chart 3). A large part of the 
decline occurred immediately after the meeting of the 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in  mid-September at which it was decided not to increase 
policy rates in the United States. Sovereign yields 
declined in all euro area countries, with lower-rated countries recording sharper declines than higher-rated countries. This led to a further reduction in the 
sovereign yield spreads relative to Germany.
EONIA forward rates declined in line with the developments in sovereign bond markets. 
The entire EONIA forward curve Œ except for the very short end 

where the ECB deposit facility anchors the level close to -20 basis points Œ shifted downward by around  20 basis points during the review period (see Chart 4). 
The daily EONIA fixings remained stable in a tight 
corridor between -12 basis points and -15 basis points during the review period.Euro area stock markets increased slightly overall during the review period after declining temporarily by around 6%. The Euro Stoxx 50 equity price index 
Chart 3Ten-year sovereign bond yields in selected euro area 
countries(percentages per annum)01
234Jan.Mar.2015MayJulySep.Germany Spain France 
Italy 
Portugal euro area Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations.
Notes: The item ﬁeuro areaﬂ denotes the GDP-weighted average of ten-year sovereign 

bond yields. The latest observation is for 21 October.
8increased by around 2% from early September to 21 October. There were significant price movements 
during the period, with the euro area stock market declining by around 6% in late September, in part owing 
to downward pressure on the stock market following the meeting of the FOMC and the disclosure of issues in Volkswagen. The US stock market, as measured by the 
Standard & Poor™s 500 equity price index, outperformed 

the euro area stock market and ended the period with an increase of around 4%. Volatility declined somewhat, but remained 
slightly above the low levels observed in the first 
half of the year. 
After the large increase in market 
volatility associated with the devaluation of the 
Chinese renminbi and the ensuing large stock market 

movements, recent developments have been relatively 
subdued, leading to a gradual decline in volatility. At 
the end of the review period measures of implied stock 
market volatility in the euro area and the United States were only slightly higher 

than the low levels observed in the first half of the year. 
The effective exchange rate of the euro remained broadly stable. In bilateral terms, the euro appreciated by 0.9% against the US dollar, reflecting changes in 
market expectations about future monetary policy in the United States. The euro 
also appreciated against the Japanese yen, the currencies of most emerging market 
economies and the currencies of several central and eastern European countries. By contrast, it depreciated against the pound sterling, the Swedish krona, the Russian rouble and the currencies of commodity-exporting countries.3 Economic activity
Despite a less supportive external environment, the economic recovery in 

the euro area is continuing, increasingly supported by domestic factors, in 
particular private consumption. Output rose by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the 
second quarter of 2015, following a rise of 0.5% in the previous quarter (see Chart 5).1 The most recent indicators point to a broadly similar pace of GDP growth in the third 
quarter. Looking at the course of the recovery so far, output has now been rising for 
almost two and a half years, and euro area real GDP stood, in the second quarter of 
2015, 2.7% above the trough it reached in the first quarter of 2013, although it remains 
0.8% below the pre-crisis peak recorded in the first quarter of 2008.Private consumption remains the main driver of the ongoing recovery. 
The consumption trend has strengthened as a result of rising income, lower oil prices and gradually less constrained household balance sheets (see also Box 3). The bulk 
1 Eurostat™s second release of the euro area national accounts revised up growth for both the first and 
second quarter of 2015 by 0.1 percentage point.Chart 4EONIA forward rates
(percentages per annum)-0.50.00.51.01.52.02.520152016201720182019202020212022202320242 September 201521 October 2015Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations.
9of the increases in aggregate real disposable income since early 2013 have been linked to improvements in the labour market, suggesting that the recovery in private consumption is primarily the result of an improving domestic economic recovery. Since the 
second half of 2014 the fall in oil prices has also provided support to real income and thus private consumption. As for the near-term outlook, recent data 

on retail trade and new passenger car registrations as well as survey data on consumer confidence are in line with a continuing robust increase in private consumption.By contrast, investment has been weak since the onset of the crisis and remained moderate in the first half of 2015. Investment currently stands 
15% below its pre-crisis level in 2008, which is largely explained by the sharp downturn in foreign and domestic demand, firms™ low profitability, a long 
period of adverse financing conditions and elevated overall uncertainty as well as lower public investment and housing market adjustments in several countries. Recently, investment has been somewhat volatile, showing a strong rise in the first 
quarter of 2015 before falling back in the second quarter. This profile largely reflects 
developments in residential investment, which was boosted in the first quarter by favourable weather conditions in parts of the euro area. Recent developments in capital goods production point to a further rise in euro area non-construction investment in the third quarter, while construction production points to ongoing weak 
developments in the construction sector. In addition, the most recent euro area bank 
lending survey shows that credit conditions remain favourable and firms™ demand 

for loans to finance investment is increasing. Looking ahead, a cyclical recovery in investment is expected, supported by favourable financing conditions, improving profit margins and diminishing spare capacity. The need for further deleveraging 
in the corporate sector in some countries and investors™ reduced long-term growth 
expectations could, however, weigh on the speed of recovery.
Euro area export growth is likely to have slowed in the third quarter, reflecting 
weak global trade. Trade data for July and August point to slowing export growth 
in the third quarter of 2015, likely driven by weak growth momentum in emerging market economies and the gradual slowdown in China. More timely indicators such as surveys signal a further weakening of foreign demand and export growth in the near term. In addition, the recent appreciation of the euro could weigh on exports looking ahead.Overall, the latest indicators are consistent with continued economic expansion in the latter half of this year.
 Hard data as well as survey results are in line with continued growth at around the same rate as in the second quarter. 
Industrial production excluding construction stood on average in July and August 

0.3% above its average level in the second quarter, when it declined by 0.1% on 
Chart 5Euro area real GDP, the Economic Sentiment Indicator 
and the composite output Purchasing Managers™ Index
(quarter-on-quarter percentage growth; index; diffusion index)
-3.0-2.5
-2.0
-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.01.520253035
4045505560
6520082009201020112012201320142015real GDP (right-hand scale)ESI (left-hand scale)
composite PMI (left-hand scale)Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, Markit and ECB.Notes: The Economic Sentiment Indicator (ESI) is normalised with the mean and 

standard deviation of the Purchasing Managers™ Index (PMI). The latest observations 

are for the second quarter of 2015 for real GDP and for September 2015 for the ESI 

and the PMI.10a quarterly basis. The Economic Sentiment Indicator 
improved between the second and third quarter of this year, while the composite output Purchasing Managers™ 
Index remained unchanged (see Chart 5).The labour market situation is continuing to gradually 
improve. Employment increased further by 0.3% quarter 
on quarter in the second quarter of 2015 (see Chart 6), 
which was the fastest annual increase since the second 
quarter of 2008. As a result, employment stood 0.9% above 
the level recorded one year earlier. The unemployment 

rate for the euro area, which started to decline in mid-2013, fell further in the second quarter of 2015, before 
broadly stabilising in July and August at 11.0%. More timely 
information gained from survey results points to further 
gradual labour market improvements in the period ahead.Looking ahead, the economic recovery is expected to continue, albeit dampened, in particular, by 

weaker foreign demand. Domestic demand should be further supported by the monetary policy measures and their favourable impact on financial conditions, as well as by the progress made with fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. Moreover, 

the decline in oil prices should provide support for households™ real disposable 
income and corporate profitability and, therefore, private consumption and investment. However, the recovery in domestic demand in the euro area continues 

to be hampered by the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and the sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms. The risks to the euro 
area growth outlook remain on the downside, reflecting in particular the heightened uncertainties regarding developments in emerging market economies. The results of 
the latest round of the ECB™s Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted in early 
October, show that private sector GDP growth forecasts remain broadly unchanged 
compared with the previous round conducted in early July (http://www.ecb.europa.
eu/stats/prices/indic/forecast/html/index.en.html).4 Prices and costs
Headline inflation dipped back into negative territory in September.
 This was 

a reflection of lower energy prices. According to Eurostat, euro area annual HICP 
inflation was -0.1% in September 2015, down from 0.1% in August (see
 Chart 7). The decline in energy inflation more than offset the small increase in food price 
inflation, which has increased for two consecutive months. This was mainly a 
result of larger price increases for the vegetables component of unprocessed food compared with the previous year.
Chart 6Euro area employment, PMI employment expectations and unemployment(quarter-on-quarter percentage growth; diffusion index; percentage of the labour force)
5678910
111213-1.0-0.8
-0.6-0.4-0.20.00.20.40.620082009201020112012201320142015employment (left-hand scale) PMI employment expectations (left-hand scale) unemployment rate (right-hand scale) Sources: Eurostat, Markit and ECB. Notes: The Purchasing Managers™ Index (PMI) is expressed as a deviation from 

50 divided by 10. The latest observations are for the second quarter of 2015 for 

employment, September 2015 for the PMI and August 2015 for unemployment.
11Underlying inflation has stabilised following the 
earlier pick-up. HICP inflation excluding energy and 
food remained unchanged at 0.9% in September. While 
non-energy industrial inflation, which was the main driver 
of the recent increase in HICP inflation excluding energy 
and food, declined in September (down to 0.3% from 
0.4%), services inflation remained stable at 1.2%. Other 
underlying inflation indicators for the euro area, such as 

a diffusion index and a measure based on a dynamic 
factor model2, have not moved up further recently either, 
although in September 2015 all indicators continued to 

record higher levels than early this year. The effects of 
the lower euro exchange rate compared with early this 
year continue to pass through, but some of the loss of 
momentum in the pick-up in underlying inflation can be 
attributed to a recent strengthening in the euro exchange 
rate and the indirect effects of recent further declines in 

oil prices (see Box 1 on oil price volatility).While growth in import prices remains strong, indicators of domestic pipeline 

pressures for underlying inflation signal continued weakness ahead. Despite 
some downward pressure from the recent appreciation of the euro, import price 
inflation for non-energy consumer goods continues to record solid annual growth rates. 
On the domestic side, indicators of pipeline pressures for non-energy consumer goods 
still point to weak dynamics along the price chain. The annual rate of producer price 

inflation for domestic sales of non-food consumer goods industries remained subdued 
in August at 0.1% for the second consecutive month. Similarly, survey data for input 
and output prices up to September point to a continuation of the subdued domestic 
price pressures at the producer level. Further weakening is likely to be evident in the 
September data on import and producer prices as the effects of the recent appreciation 
of the euro and the decline in oil prices continue to filter through. 
Profit margins contributed to a marginal strengthening of domestic price pressures, while labour cost pressures remained moderate. Euro area annual wage growth remained unchanged in the second quarter of 2015 in terms of 
compensation per employee, whereas it was somewhat weaker in terms of hours worked. Growth in compensation per employee was similar to growth in negotiated wages, implying that there has been little impact from wage drift elements such as bonuses. As productivity grew at a stronger rate than compensation per employee, 
growth in unit labour costs weakened further in the second quarter of 2015. At 
the same time, profit growth (measured in terms of gross operating surplus) strengthened, which may have been facilitated by lower input costs and moderate 
wage costs. As a result of labour cost and profit margin developments, the growth in 
the GDP deflator, a broad indicator of domestic inflationary pressures, strengthened 
further in the second quarter of 2015 and continued the upward trend observed since the third quarter of 2014.2 See the Box entitled ﬁHas underlying inflation reached a turning point?ﬂ, 
Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB, July 2015.Chart 7Contribution of components to euro area HICP inflation
(annual percentage changes; percentage point contributions)-2-101234520082009201020112012201320142015non-energy industrial goods services food 
energy HICP Sources: Eurostat and ECB staff calculations.
Note: The latest observations are for September 2015.
12Survey-based measures of long-term inflation expectations have remained stable, while those for the short-to-medium term have declined somewhat (see Chart 8). The results of the ECB 
Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) for the fourth quarter of 2015 (i.e. the most recent SPF) indicate that forecasters have revised their inflation expectations downwards to 0.1%, 1.0% and 1.5% for 2015, 2016 and 
2017 respectively, largely reflecting the impact of lower 
oil prices (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/prices/
indic/forecast/html/index.en.html). However, longer-term 
inflation expectations for five years ahead remained unchanged, standing at 1.9%. The latest market-based measures of long-term inflation expectations were roughly the same as 
in early September.
 After declining in the course 
of September, market-based measures of inflation 
expectations subsequently increased again from the beginning of October onwards to end the review period roughly unchanged. More specifically, the five-year 
forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead declined from 1.69% to 1.57% 
during September. It subsequently increased from the beginning of October onwards 

to stand at 1.68%. Market-based measures of long-term inflation expectations remain somewhat lower than the local peak level reached in early July. Compared 
with the more stable survey-based measures of inflation expectations, recent movements in market-based inflation expectations may be attributable to changes in the inflation risk premium reflecting the dynamics in macroeconomic uncertainty. 
On the basis of current oil futures prices, annual HICP inflation is expected to 
remain negative or low until November 2015 and to rise only at the turn of the year, mainly on account of base effects associated with the fall in oil prices in 
late 2014. Inflation rates are forecast to pick up further in 2016 and 2017, supported 
by the expected economic recovery, the pass-through of past declines in the euro 
exchange rate and the assumption of somewhat higher oil prices in the years ahead that is currently reflected in oil futures markets. However, there are risks stemming 
from the economic outlook and from financial and commodity market developments which could further slow down the gradual increase in inflation rates towards levels 
closer to 2%. 5 Money and credit
Broad money growth remained robust. The annual growth rate of M3, however, 
showed a decline in August (see
 Chart 9). M3 growth continues to be driven by solid M1 dynamics (the annual growth rate of which decreased somewhat in August). 
The robust growth of overnight deposits plays an important role here and can be explained by the low opportunity costs of holding the most liquid instruments as well Chart 8Survey-based measures of inflation expectations(annual percentage changes)-0.50.00.5
1.0
1.5
2.020132014201520162017201820192020SPF Q4 2015SPF Q3 2015
Consensus Economics (October 2015) September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections HICP Sources: Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), Consensus Economics and ECB calculations.
Note: Realised HICP data are included up to Q3 2015.
13as the impact of the ECB™s expanded asset purchase 
programme (APP). Overall, recent developments in narrow money are still consistent with a continuation of the economic recovery in the euro area.Overnight deposits made a sizeable contribution to M3 growth. By contrast, short-term deposits other than overnight deposits are contracting, particularly 
those with an agreed maturity of up to two years. The 
growth rate of marketable instruments (i.e. M3 minus M2), which has a small weight in M3, remained positive; 
reflecting inter alia the recovery in money market fund shares/units observed since mid-2014. In addition, growth of monetary financial institution (MFI) debt securities in the money-holding sector with a maturity of up to two years has been strong since the start of 2015. Domestic sources of money creation continued to be of increasing importance in August. This development is partly explained by the ECB™s 
non-standard monetary policy measures. From a counterpart perspective, M3 dynamics appear to be mainly driven by shifts away 
from longer-term financial liabilities and by the increased contribution of credit from MFIs. The latter reflects positive developments regarding the provision of credit 
to the private sector (the main drag on money growth in previous years) and the impact of the APP. The annual contraction in the longer-term financial liabilities of 

MFIs (excluding capital and reserves) held by the money-holding sector continued unabated in August. Its strong contribution to M3 growth reflects in particular the 
relatively flat yield curve and also (in part) the substitution by MFIs of longer-term debt securities with funds from targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs). The contribution to annual M3 growth made by net external assets 
remained negative. Compared with its peak in mid-2014, the support from the MFI sector™s net external asset position decreased further in August, despite a sizeable 

surplus in the current account. The recent decline in net external assets mainly 
reflects growing net portfolio outflows from the euro area in the context of the APP, which has favoured portfolio rebalancing towards non-euro area investment 
instruments.Loan dynamics remained on a path of gradual recovery.
3 The annual growth rate of MFI loans to the private sector increased slightly in August (see
 Chart 9). The gradual improvement in credit dynamics was noticeable for both firms and households. The annual growth of loans to non-financial corporations (NFCs) 
(adjusted for sales and securitisation) grew again in August and was significantly 
above the trough observed in February 2014. The annual growth of loans to 
3 On 21 September 2015 the ECB published new data on loans adjusted for sales and securitisation, 
based on an enhanced adjustment method. The new method enables a more comprehensive view 
of developments in loans originated by euro area MFIs by taking into account, on an ongoing basis, 
stocks and repayments of loans that are no longer recorded on MFIs™ balance sheets (i.e. derecognised 

loans). For more details, see the box entitled ﬁNew data on loans to the private sector adjusted for 
sales and securitisationﬂ in this issue of the Economic Bulletin. Chart 9M3 and loans to the private sector(annual rate of growth and annualised six-month growth rate)-4-202
4
681012
141620082009201020112012201320142015M3 (annual growth rate) M3 (annualised six-month growth rate) 
loans to the private sector (annual growth rate) 
loans to the private sector (annualised six-month growth rate) Source: ECB.Note: The latest observation is for August 2015. 
14households also increased in August, thus significantly exceeding the average 
rate of 0.1% observed since summer 2012. Despite these positive developments, the consolidation of bank balance sheets and further deleveraging needs in some economic sectors and banking jurisdictions continue to hamper credit dynamics.Bank lending rates for NFCs declined further in August, notably owing to the ECB™s non-standard measures (see
 Chart 10). The ECB™s accommodative 
monetary policy stance, a strengthened balance sheet situation and receding fragmentation in financial markets in general have supported a decrease in banks™ 
composite funding costs, which have stabilised at close to historically low levels. Since the announcement of the credit easing package in June 2014, banks have been progressively passing on the decline in their funding costs in the form of lower lending rates. Consequently, rates on loans to 
NFCs were more favourable in August (the composite 
bank lending rates for euro area NFCs fell to 2.16%). 
Indeed, since May 2014, these rates have declined by around 80 basis points. In addition, rates on loans to households for house purchase increased somewhat in August, continuing the trend observed in the 
previous month (the composite bank lending rates for households for house purchase stood at 2.26%). The 
cumulative decrease in mortgage rates since May 2014 
remains sizeable though, amounting to around 60 basis points. The October 2015 euro area bank lending survey suggests that changes in credit standards and loan demand are continuing to support a recovery in loan growth (see survey at: https://www.ecb.europa.
eu/stats/money/surveys/lend/html/index.en.html). In the third quarter of 2015, banks further eased (in net terms) credit standards for loans to non-financial corporations. This was mainly because of increased competition in the banking 
sector. For households, credit standards tightened on loans for house purchase 
(mostly reflecting developments in the Netherlands), but continued to ease in respect of consumer credit. Banks again reported that the additional liquidity from the APP 
is being used for granting loans. In this context, the APP had a net easing impact on 

credit standards and particularly on credit terms and conditions. Furthermore, the survey points to a pick-up in demand for loans in all categories, with the low general level of interest rates, increased financing needs for fixed investment and housing market prospects being important drivers here. In addition, monthly data show that the net issuance of debt securities by NFCs moderated again in August and September, after the temporary rebound 
of July.
 This development was most likely a result of recent increases in the cost 

of market-based debt financing. A further strengthening of retained earnings may 
have also played a role, by reducing NFCs™ need to tap external sources of finance. 

The weakening in debt securities issuance follows the strong use of this funding tool Chart 10Composite bank lending rates for NFCs and households(percentages per annum)23
4
5
6720082009201020112012201320142015non-financial corporations households for house purchase Source: ECB.Notes: The indicator for the composite bank lending rates is calculated by aggregating 

short and long-term rates using a 24-month moving average of new business volumes. 
The latest observation is for August 2015.
15by NFCs and their conduits in the wake of the public sector purchase programme (PSPP), which generated very favourable market conditions.The overall nominal cost of external financing for euro area NFCs increased further in the third quarter of 2015, following the historically low levels reached in February. 
This rise was driven by the decline in financial asset prices, which implied an increase in both the cost of equity and market-based debt financing for NFCs. In the third quarter of 2015, such costs were up by some 30 basis points on the second quarter and even 50 basis points higher than in February. However, 
during October, the cost of equity financing fell after a rise in share prices, while the 
cost of market-based debt financing continued to increase.16Box 1  Trade links between the euro area 

and ChinaOver recent decades, China™s role in global trade has grown significantly. 
With 
several economic reforms starting in the late 1970s, it has grown rapidly and become 
an increasingly important player in the global economy. In 1980 Chinese imports 
accounted for just over 6% of GDP, but by 2014, they had increased to 19% as a result 
of trade liberalisation, the country™s accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001 
and rapid investment growth in the Chinese economy. In addition to traditional trade, 
China also plays a central role in global supply chains, processing intermediate inputs 
for subsequent re-export to a third destination. Since 2011, however, the country™s 

growth prospects have weakened, as the economy is undergoing a rebalancing from 
investment-driven growth towards a path of more balanced economic growth. 
China accounts for a relatively limited share of euro area exports, although this share has risen over time. Exports to China have rapidly increased across all euro area economies over the past 15 years, rising from 2% of total extra-euro area exports of goods to 6% at the end of 2014. Germany, France and Finland 
account for the largest shares of exports to China, while other countries™ shares range from close to 6% in 

Luxembourg to 1% in Lithuania (see Chart A). China™s 
share of extra-euro area exports is comparable to that 
of Switzerland and less than half that of the United States or the United Kingdom.The slowing of growth in China since the beginning of 2015 has reduced euro area exports, in particular exports of machinery and transport equipment. This has had adverse repercussions for, in particular, 
exporters of manufactured goods (see Chart B), which 
account for almost 90% of goods exports to China. Conversely, exports of food, drink and tobacco and raw 
materials have been holding up, signalling that consumption and intermediate goods exports are still buoyant. These recent developments are consistent with China™s 

role in processing intermediate inputs for final consumption and with the rebalancing of the Chinese economy towards consumption and away from investment-driven growth. The fall in euro area goods exports to China has partly been offset by increasing exports to other advanced economies. While exports to China have declined rapidly and provided negative contributions to euro area export growth, 
demand in other advanced economies, such as the United States and European Chart AExports to China(percentage share of total extra-euro area exports)01
2
3
45678910DEFRFIEALUATITPTCYBENLESIEEELVSIGRMTLTSK20002014
Q1 2015 euro areaSource: IMF Direction of Trade Statistics.

17countries outside the euro area, has increased and provided an impetus to euro area export growth, demonstrating the renewed importance of advanced economies for global trade growth in 2015 amid slowing emerging market economies (see Chart C). Indirect trade spillovers from China to the euro area are likely to be small and mainly concern other Asian countries. While direct trade links between the euro area and China remain limited, there could be adverse trade spillovers whereby 
important export destinations for the euro area, which are also large trading partners for China, experience slowdowns. The largest export destinations of the euro area, 
Chart BEuro area exports of goods to China by product category(annual percentage change; percentage point contributions)-1501530
4520082009201020112012201320142015raw materialsmanufactured productsotherfood, drinks and tobacco
energytotalSources: Eurostat and ECB calculations. 
Chart CExtra-euro area exports of goods and country contributions(annual percentage change; percentage point contributions)-25-20
-15
-10-50
510
15
2020082009201020112012201320142015otherAsia excluding Chinanon-euro area EuropeChinaLatin AmericaUnited States
RussiatotalSources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.18excluding China, are the United States, the United Kingdom and Switzerland. These countries, in turn, 
have relatively small export exposures to China and are unlikely to be severely impacted by a slowdown in Chinese activity (see Chart D). The countries that 
are most likely to be affected by a domestic slowdown 
in China are neighbouring economies in Asia, which, 
when taken as a whole, account for a relatively large 
share of euro area export demand (around 21%). Overall, however, available estimates suggest that the 
direct and indirect trade effects from a 1 percentage 
point slowdown in Chinese real GDP are relatively 
muted, and amount to a decline of around 0.1 to 
0.15 percentage points in euro area activity after two to three years. China™s role in global production chains may limit 
the transmission of negative developments to the euro area. Exports of intermediate goods to China have 
become increasingly important over time; their share increased from 53% in 1995 to 59% in 2011. This relatively large share highlights 

China™s prominent role in global value chains, whereby products are shipped to China 
for further processing or assembly and then re-exported to another destination for 
final consumption. In this context, and with the latest available data being from 2011, 
at least 8% of euro area exports to China are not directly linked to developments there, but rather reflect demand developments elsewhere. Arguably, some exports 
of final goods could also be involved in global production networks, supporting the production of goods to be sent to a third destination and thereby reflecting final demand elsewhere. Hence, a slowing of Chinese activity is likely to have less of an impact than would be suggested by gross trade flows.While trade spillovers from a continued slowdown of economic activity in China are likely to have only a modest impact on euro area GDP, other spillover 

channels can potentially be important. The size of the Chinese economy means it 
has had a significant effect on oil prices, although its relevance has waned in recent 

years as growth has continued to decline. Therefore, the impact of a slowdown in 
China on oil prices may be limited, although it crucially depends on whether growth in other emerging market economies slows as well. While China would also affect some 

commodity-producing emerging markets via lower metal imports, major exporters of metals account for a fairly small share of euro area trade. Another possible 
channel for transmitting negative shocks to the euro area is confidence effects, 
where, for instance, capital outflows can be triggered by adverse confidence shocks, leading to a tightening of financial conditions in emerging markets and a further slowdown of euro area foreign demand. Moreover, capital outflows from China, if not 
counterbalanced by other private or official flows, could trigger a depreciation of the 

Chinese currency and, in its wake, exchange rate depreciations of other emerging market currencies. Finally, a rise in global uncertainty could directly affect the 
confidence of euro area households and firms, hampering consumption and delaying Chart DTrade exposure to China 
(percentages)0510
15
20
2530UnitedKingdomUnitedStatesSwitzerlandRussiaJapanKoreaIndiaChina™s share of national exports
national share of euro area exports
Source: ECB calculations.19investment decisions. Therefore, the impact on the euro area of a potential further 
slowdown in China ultimately hinges on the extent to which this slowdown spills over to other emerging markets more generally, and the degree to which the resulting loss 
of confidence affects global financial markets as well as global trade. 
20Box 2  Explaining the drivers of the recent 
increase in oil price volatilityAfter reaching historically high levels during the global financial crisis, oil 
price volatility decreased gradually in recent years before rising again in 2014 
and 2015. Although current volatility is not particularly high by historical standards, 
oil price volatility in itself may weigh on economic 

prospects.1 Understanding the factors driving 
changes in oil price volatility is therefore important. 

This box discusses the general determinants of oil 
price volatility and focuses on the likely causes of the 
recent increase.Time-variation in oil price volatility can be driven by 
a number of factors. 
Three main possible explanations 
of higher oil price volatility are (i) large shocks to oil demand and supply, (ii) an increased sensitivity of oil 
prices to changes in demand and supply and (iii) an increased use of oil as a financial asset. These three 

potential drivers of time-variation in oil price volatility could all have an impact at any given point in time. Higher oil price volatility can simply be caused by large shocks to oil demand or supply.
 The drop in 
global oil demand triggered by the 2008 global financial crisis is an example of how large shifts in demand and supply fundamentals can cause higher oil price volatility (see Chart A). 
Oil prices can become more sensitive to changes in oil demand and supply as 
a result of lower price elasticity of demand and supply, causing higher oil price 
volatility.
 Lower price elasticity of oil demand and supply means that both demand 
and supply react less to oil price changes induced by shocks. As this implies that the 
quantity adjustment following shocks is lower, the price response is magnified, thus 

causing increased price volatility. 
Various factors, such as the level of spare capacity or inventories, can explain 
why the price elasticity of oil demand and supply might be lower in specific periods. On the one hand, a reduced flexibility to alter oil supply following price 
changes might be triggered by low levels of spare capacity or limited inventory holdings. In mid-2012, for example, oil prices reacted strongly to news about ongoing and potential supply disruptions in the wake of the Iranian oil embargo as 1 Jo, S., ﬁThe effects of oil price uncertainty on global real economic activityﬂ, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 46, No 6, pp. 1113-1135, 2014.Chart AOil prices and oil price volatility(USD per barrel)02040
608010012002550
75100125150oil price (left-hand scale)oil price volatility (right-hand scale)200720082009201020112012201320142015Source: Datastream.Notes: Daily data, latest observation is 5 October 2015. Oil prices are nominal. 
Brent crude oil prices. Oil price volatility is measured by the Chicago Board Options 

Exchange (CBOE) Crude Oil Exchange-Traded Fund (ETF) Volatility Index (OVX). 

The OVX is strongly correlated with realised oil price volatility.
21spare capacity among members of the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) was low and inventory holdings were below historical averages, indicating that supply could not easily increase to compensate for any further decline in production. On the other hand, a reduced price sensitivity of oil demand might, for example, be related to a reduced potential to replace oil with alternative energy sources. The gains in energy conservation following the oil price shocks of the 1970s 
might have caused higher oil price volatility as demand became less sensitive to price changes.2Global uncertainty is another factor that might cause 

reduced price elasticity of oil demand and supply. 
Higher uncertainty can change the price elasticity of 
both oil demand and oil supply.
3 In an environment 
of greater uncertainty, oil producers and consumers 
have a less marked reaction to oil price changes as 
they have a so-called ﬁoption-value-to-waitﬂ.4 This 
reduced responsiveness lowers the quantity adjustment 
following shocks and magnifies the oil price effect, 
thereby increasing oil price volatility. Previous episodes 
of elevated global uncertainty, as measured by the 
Volatility Index (VIX), indeed coincided with higher oil 
price volatility. This happened, for example, during the 
European sovereign debt crisis in 2011 (see Chart B). 
Finally, it is often argued that the increased use of 
oil as a financial asset causes oil price volatility 
to be higher, although the empirical evidence on 
this remains mixed. Since the early 2000s, oil has increasingly been used as a financial asset; a process referred to as the ﬁfinancialisationﬂ of oil futures markets. The increased use of paper 

oil for financial investment, hedging and speculation purposes might have intensified 
the sensitivity of oil prices to investor sentiment. However, the empirical evidence on 
the significance of this factor is not clear-cut.5Focusing on the recent period, a combination of a large oil supply shock and higher global uncertainty are the probable causes of the increase in oil price volatility since the end of 2014. First, the decline in oil prices in the second half of 2014 was accompanied by large increases in oil supply; the year-on-
year increases in global production were substantially above historical averages. Combined with weak demand and the decision by OPEC not to cut its production, this led at the end of 2014 to a strong decline in oil prices and increased oil price 2 Baumeister, C. and Peersman,G., ﬁThe role of time-varying price elasticities in accounting for volatility 
changes in the crude oil marketﬂ, Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 28, pp.1087-1109, 2013.3 Van Robays, I., ﬁMacroeconomic uncertainty and the impact of oil shocksﬂ, 
ECB Working Paper, No 1479, 2012.4 Bernanke, B.S., ﬁIrreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investmentﬂ, 
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 98, No 1, pp. 85-106, 1983.5 See, among others, Singleton, K. J., ﬁInvestor flows and the 2008 boom/bust in oil pricesﬂ, Management 

Science, Vol. 60, pp. 300Œ318, 2012 versus Fattouh, B., Kilian, L. and Mahadeva, L., ﬁThe role of 
speculation in oil markets: What have we learned so far?ﬂ, Energy Journal, Vol. 34, No 3, pp. 7-33, 2013.Chart BOil price volatility and global uncertainty(index points)020406080100120global uncertainty (as measured by VIX)oil price volatility200720082009201020112012201320142015Source: Datastream.Notes: Daily data, latest observation is 5 October 2015. The Volatility Index (VIX) is 

based on the implied volatility of S&P 500 index options.
22volatility. More recently, the renewed increase in oil price volatility coincided with a 
spike in global uncertainty at the end of August 2015 (see Chart B) which was mainly 
linked to concerns over the strength of Chinese growth. In contrast, changes in oil inventory holdings and spare capacity probably did not drive the increase in oil price volatility as inventories are at historic highs and total OPEC spare capacity is not far below past averages. Given that global uncertainty is likely to remain elevated in the near-term, oil prices will continue to be sensitive to any new information about oil demand and supply developments.23Box 3  An assessment of recent euro area  consumption growthPrivate consumption has been continuously increasing since the first quarter of 2013, becoming the main driver behind the ongoing economic recovery in the euro area. This box examines the main driving factors behind these developments in euro area consumption growth since the first quarter of 2013, which 
was the latest trough to be experienced in the business cycle.1The decline in oil prices has been supporting private consumption growth, particularly since the second half of 2014. The purchasing power of households 
has increased by around 0.9 percentage point due to the fall in energy prices 
between the start of the recovery and the second quarter of 2015 (see Chart A).
2 Yet,
 this represented roughly only one-third of the overall improvement in households™ 
purchasing power observed over this period. The additional improvement in 
purchasing power is mainly attributable to strong increases in labour income.3 1 As identified by the Centre for Economic Policy Research.
2 Changes in the purchasing power of households due to fluctuations in energy prices are equal to the 
product of the energy expenditure share and the percentage rate of change in real energy prices.3 Although the price of crude oil in EUR terms has declined by more than 40% since the second half of 

2014, the decline in consumer energy prices was much lower. For example, the price of liquid fuels and 

fuels and lubricants for personal transportation declined by only 12% in the same period in the euro area.Chart AEnergy and non-energy-related developments in real disposable income(index; Q3 2011 =100)
101100999897
96Sep.20112012Mar.Sep.2013Mar.Sep.2014Mar.Sep.2015Mar.real incomereal income adjustedprivate consumptionincrease in purchasing power 
due to lower 
energy pricesincrease in purchasing powerdue to other
factorsSources: Eurostat and ECB staff calculations.

Note: Real income adjusted is calculated assuming constant real energy prices from 


disposable income that could have prevailed had oil prices not declined as observed.Chart BGross nominal disposable income growth and contributions(annual percentage changes; percentage points)non-labour incomeemployment2011532410-1
-2
-32012201320142015compensation per employeegross disposable incomeSources: Eurostat and ECB staff calculations.
Note: Non-labour income constitutes operating surplus, property income, net social 

24Private consumption has been supported by strong growth in real disposable income since the beginning of 2013, following gradual but steady improvements in the labour market. Growth of compensation per employee accelerated, albeit temporarily, in the second half of 2013. The negative 
contribution of employment growth to gross disposable income stabilised in early 2013 and improved steadily 
thereafter, turning positive in the first quarter of 2014 for 
the first time since 2011 (see Chart B). In line with this, 
the unemployment rate in the euro area stopped rising in 2013 and started to fall in 2014. Nevertheless, the current level of employment remains around 2% below 
its pre-crisis peak in 2008, while unemployment is still high at a rate of 11% last August.
Recent consumption growth has been higher in 
countries where labour markets have improved to 
a greater extent. In Spain, Ireland and Portugal the 
recovery of the labour market, in terms of both employment and wages, has been 

relatively strong, leading to higher increases in disposable income and real consumption 
growth (see Chart C). After years of households™ deleveraging in these countries, 
higher disposable income is also helping to strengthen households™ balance sheets 

(see Chart D). While consumption is growing, the leverage ratio continues to go down 
(except for France). This suggests there may now be a virtuous circle effect between a 
recovery in the labour market, increasing disposable income, and higher consumption 
growth, while the degree of household leverage continues to fall.A comparison of consumption projections across several vintages of the ECB/Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area suggests that recent consumption developments have been broadly in line with expectations, once the oil price declines have been factored in. In June 2014, prior to the observed sharp declines in oil 
prices, the Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections 
envisaged moderate consumption growth of 0.7% in 2014, followed by a stronger recovery of 1.5% in 2015. Since then, consumption growth accelerated in the second half of 2014, and continued increasing steadily 
in the first half of 2015. This profile had already been 
envisaged in the March 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic 
projections, which was the first ECB staff exercise 
to account for lower oil prices that had proved more persistent than expected. This robust consumption 
growth projection remained unchanged in the September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, 

with a growth rate of 1.7% for 2015, against an outcome 
of 1.0% in 2014. This projection was also broadly 
confirmed by the latest data release for consumption growth in the second quarter of 2015.Chart CLabour income and private consumption across selected euro area countries(percentage changes)4.03.53.0
2.5
2.0
1.51.00.50.0-0.5ITFREADEPTIEESnumber of employeescompensation per employee
real consumptionSources: Eurostat and ECB staff calculations.
Note: Figures refer to average annual percentage changes between the second quarter of 2014 and the second quarter of 2015.Chart DHousehold leverage across selected euro area countries(as a percentage of disposable income)5070
90110
130
150170190
21023025020082009201020112012201320142015IE PT IT DE FR EAES Sources: Eurostat and ECB staff calculations.
Note: The leverage ratio is computed as the ratio of household debt over the 

four-quarter moving sum of disposable income.25ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 Œ Box 4Box 4  New data on loans to the private sector 
adjusted for sales and securitisationMonitoring banks™ financing of the economy is a key element of the ECB™s 
monetary analysis. Bank lending is the main source of monetary expansion in the euro area and a key channel through which monetary policy conditions are transmitted to the real economy.
Statistical series on loans adjusted for sales and securitisation aim to provide measures of bank lending which are not affected by loan transfers off and onto banks™ balance sheets. 
Banks™ balance sheets are the basic source of the 
bank lending figures published by the ECB.1 This implies that when a bank sells part 
of its loan portfolio to a non-bank and removes those loans from its balance sheet (for instance in the context of securitisation activities), a reduction in bank lending is reported, while the actual amount of financing received by the real economy remains 
unchanged. With the aim of providing a measure of bank lending which is not affected by this type of operation, the ECB has been publishing loan series adjusted 
for sales and securitisation since December 2008.In September 2015 the ECB released new data on loans adjusted for sales and securitisation based on a refined method offering a more comprehensive view of all lending to the real economy originated by banks as well as better comparability across countries. The former method adjusted loan transactions 
for the one-off impact of the net transfer of loans off (or onto) balance sheets in the 
period in question. The new method continues to do so, but also takes into account 
the ongoing repayments of those loans that are no longer recorded on banks™ 
balance sheets (derecognised loans), insofar as data are available.2 It also considers the outstanding amounts of derecognised loans in the calculation of the adjusted 
growth rates. Therefore, to the extent that data on repayments of derecognised 
loans are available, the new method offers a comprehensive view of developments 
in loans granted by euro area banks, independently of whether or not the loans are recorded on banks™ balance sheets at the time of the statistical reporting. In doing so, 
the method also improves the comparability of bank lending figures across countries, regardless of the accounting practices applicable to loan transfers.1 Details on the calculation of transactions and growth rates for monetary financial institution (MFI) loan series are provided in the Technical Notes to the ECB™s Statistics Bulletin (Sections 2.1 to 2.6), at  http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node=100000222 Under Regulation ECB/2013/33 of 24 September 2013 concerning the balance sheet of the MFI 

sector, as of December 2014 MFIs report data on derecognised loans which have been securitised 
and continue to be serviced by MFIs. In addition, some national central banks also provide data, where 
available, on securitised loans not serviced by MFIs and loans transferred in a transaction other than 
a securitisation. Backdata on a comparable basis have also been compiled in order to provide greater 
consistency in statistical series on loans adjusted for sales and securisation over time (i.e. adjusted 
annual growth rates for loans to the private sector starting from September 1998, and for loans to 
households and non-financial corporations from January 2010).26ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 Œ Box 4The new method of adjustment generally results in lower growth rates than the former method, but the trends remain basically unchanged (see Chart A). This difference is explained by flow and stock effects. 

First, the inclusion of repayments of derecognised loans results in somewhat lower adjusted flows of loans compared with the former method. Second, the inclusion of the stocks of derecognised loans increases 
the base on which the growth rates are computed, thereby reducing the growth rates in absolute value terms. In other words, the stock effect contributes 
to making positive growth rates lower, and negative 
growth rates less negative, under the new method than 
under the former method.3 The lower growth rates observed under the 
new adjustment method mainly result from the 
repayments of derecognised loans (flow effect). The stock of derecognised loans is small relative to the 
total outstanding amount of loans (derecognised loans to the euro area private sector amounted to •0.4 trillion in July 2015, compared with total loans on MFI balance sheets of •10.8 trillion). Therefore, the inclusion of the derecognised stocks typically 

has a small (upward or downward) impact on growth rates. However, the repayments 

of derecognised loans have a significant downward impact. Charts B and C show the impact of the new adjustment method on the annual growth rates for loans to 3 Further details on the differences between the new and former adjustment methods are provided 
in an explanatory note on the ECB™s website, at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2015/html/pr150921_explanatory_note_adjusted_loans.pdfChart AMFI loans to the euro area private sector adjusted for sales and securitisation(annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted)-4-3-2-10
123
4June 2011Dec. 
2011June 
2012Dec. 
2012June 
2013Dec. 
2013June 
2014Dec. 
2014June 
2015private sectorhouseholds
non˜financial corporationsSource: ECB.Note: The solid lines represent the new method and the dotted lines represent the 

former method. The latest observation is for July 2015.
Chart BMFI loans to euro area households: impact of the new adjustment method on annual growth rates(difference in annual growth rates between the new and former adjustment methods; basis points; non-seasonally adjusted)
a) Impact on annual growth rates in terms of the flow and stock effectsb) Impact on annual growth rates in terms of national contributionsflow effectstock effecttotal impact20122013201420150-20-40
-60
-80-100
-1200-20
-40
-60
-80-100
-120BelgiumIrelandother euro area countriesFrance
Netherlandstotal impact2012201320142015Sources: ECB and ECB calculations.Note: The latest observation is for July 2015.
27ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 Œ Box 4households (Chart B) and loans to non-financial corporations (NFCs) (Chart C) due to flow and stock effects, as well as the four largest contributions by country. 
For loans to households, the difference in growth rates comes from countries with a relatively large share of derecognised loans, which leads to larger loan repayments being included under the new method. This includes Belgium and 
France, which have 15% and 25% of euro area derecognised loans to households 
respectively and are thus the main national contributors to the overall impact of the new method (see Chart B). Ireland and the Netherlands, along with several other countries, have contributed to a lesser degree.For loans to NFCs, the high rate of repayments of derecognised loans explains the difference in growth rates between the new and former methods. NFC loans tend to have shorter maturities, which results in repayments that are large relative to the outstanding amounts. Indeed, the main contribution comes from France (see Chart C), where repayments have recently increased owing to a rise in securitisations of short-term loans. Belgium and Germany have also consistently contributed to the lower NFC annual growth rates, while other countries have made a limited contribution. Overall, the new method of adjustment enhances the analysis of loan growth rates at the euro area and the national level. The recent widening of the difference 
between the annual growth rates under the new and former methods also highlights the relevance of the adjustment method for interpreting trends in these series. The 
ECB and national central banks continue to carry out work on historical data with the aim of further supplementing the analysis of loans to euro area households and NFCs adjusted for sales and securitisation.Chart CMFI loans to euro area non-financial corporations: impact of the new adjustment method on annual growth rates(difference in annual growth rates between the new and former adjustment methods; basis points; non-seasonally adjusted)
a) Impact on annual growth rates in terms of the flow and stock effectsb) Impact on annual growth rates in terms of national contributions0-10-20-30
-40
-50
-60102012201320142015flow effectstock effecttotal impact-10-20
-30-40-50
-6002012201320142015BelgiumFranceother euro area countriesGermany
Italytotal impactSources: ECB and ECB calculations. Note: The latest observation is for July 2015
28Box 5  The creation of a European Fiscal BoardOn 21 October 2015 the European Commission adopted its Communication1 on steps towards completing Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), following up on the short-term reform proposals made in the Five Presidents™ 
Report2. The Communication includes a variety of measures aimed at improving the functioning 
of EMU. These merit a discussion in their own right, but this box focuses on one 
particular element, namely the Commission™s Decision
3 establishing an independent advisory European Fiscal Board. In line with the roadmap presented in the Five Presidents™ Report, the European Fiscal Board was established on 1 November 2015 
and is expected to become operational by mid-2016. Steps towards improving fiscal governance An independent assessment of the European Commission and the Council™s 
application of the rules laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) should help increase the transparency and consistency of fiscal surveillance 
at the European level. Recent reforms of the EU™s fiscal governance framework, 
notably the ﬁsix-packﬂ and ﬁtwo-packﬂ regulations, aimed to ensure a more effective 

implementation of the SGP rules. The reinforced framework has grown in complexity, 
rendering it difficult for the public and elected representatives to hold the Commission 
and the Council accountable for their actions without additional information provided 
by a well-informed, independent body. In this vein, as early as 2010 the Governing 
Council of the ECB called for the creation of an independent fiscal agency at the euro area level. The special nature of the euro area also warrants an independent 
assessment of its aggregate fiscal policy stance, which should be carried out on the basis of the SGP rules and should carefully take into account sustainability 
considerations for individual countries. For such a body to be effective, it needs 
to have the right to carry out and publish its assessments in real time. Those 

assessments could then support an informed debate on decisions taken by the Council and Commission, both in the public arena and in the European Parliament.Most EU Member States have already established independent fiscal councils to strengthen national budgetary frameworks. The recent reforms of the EU fiscal governance framework broadened the role and tasks of independent public institutions at the Member State level in order to foster budgetary discipline and 
increase national ownership of EU fiscal rules.4 While the mandates of the fiscal councils in EU Member States differ considerably across countries, the councils are 
1 http://www.ec.europa.eu/priorities/economic-monetary-union/docs/single-market-strategy/
communication-emu-steps_en.pdf2 The report, ﬁCompleting Europe™s Economic and Monetary Unionﬂ, is available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/
priorities/economic-monetary-union/docs/5-presidents-report_en.pdf3 http://www.ec.europa.eu/priorities/economic-monetary-union/docs/single-market-strategy/decision-

efb_en.pdf4 See the box entitled ﬁFiscal councils in EU countriesﬂ, 
Monthly Bulletin, ECB, June 2014.29typically in charge of monitoring compliance with national fiscal rules, including the functioning of the automatic correction mechanism required by the fiscal compact as part of the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the Economic and 
Monetary Union. The ﬁtwo-packﬂ also lays down specific standards for the institutional 
set-up of independent fiscal institutions at the national level. These include not only 
the capacity to communicate publicly in a timely manner, but also, for example, a far-
reaching organisational independence based on a statutory regime grounded in laws, regulations or binding administrative provisions.5 The Five Presidents™ 
Report published on 22 June 2015 recommends the 
establishment of an advisory European Fiscal Board to complement national 
fiscal councils and to improve the transparency of the application of the SGP. 
The main task envisaged for the European Fiscal Board is ﬁto provide a public and independent assessment, at European level, of how budgets Œ and their execution Œ perform against the economic objectives and recommendations set out in the EU fiscal governance frameworkﬂ. The report specifies that the European 
Fiscal Board ﬁshould be able to issue opinions when it considers it necessary, 
including in particular in connection with the assessment of Stability Programmes 
and presentation of the annual Draft Budgetary Plans and the execution of national budgetsﬂ. While the European Commission Œ in line with its prerogatives under the EU Treaties
 Œ should have the right to deviate from the views of the European Fiscal Board on the implementation of the fiscal rules, it would need to justify such deviations (the ﬁcomply or explainﬂ principle). This means that the European Fiscal 

Board needs to carry out and publish its analyses in real time. Furthermore, it should provide an ex post evaluation of how the governance framework was implemented, as well as form an economic judgement on the appropriate fiscal stance at the national and euro area levels on the basis of the SGP. The Board™s advice should 
feed into the decisions taken by the Commission in the context of the European Semester, which was introduced under the ﬁsix-packﬂ regulation to improve the 
coordination of Member States™ fiscal and economic policies. Lastly, the new advisory 

entity should also coordinate and complement the national fiscal councils that have been set up under the EU Directive on budgetary frameworks6. In this context, it should conform to the same standard of institutional independence as the national 
fiscal councils. Composition, role and mandate of the European Fiscal BoardThe European Fiscal Board will be composed of five renowned experts,  i.e. one Chair and four members, with credible competence and experience in macroeconomics and practical budgetary policy-making. While the Chair and one member will be appointed by the European Commission upon a proposal of the 
President, after having consulted the Vice-President for the Euro and Social Dialogue 
and the Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs, Taxation and Customs, 
5 See Article 2 of Regulation (EU) No 473/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
21 May 2013 on common provisions for monitoring and assessing draft budgetary plans and ensuring 
the correction of excessive deficit of the Member States in the euro area.6 See Council Directive 2011/85/EU of 8 November 2011 on requirements for budgetary frameworks of 

the Member States.30the other three members will be appointed by the Commission upon a proposal of the President, after having consulted the national fiscal councils, the European Central Bank and the Eurogroup Working Group. The Board will be supported by 
a secretariat Œ consisting of a Head of Secretariat and dedicated supporting staff 
members Œ which will be attached to the Secretariat General of the European Commission for administrative purposes, but which will report solely to the Board. The Chief Economist Analyst (CEA) will exercise the function of Head of Secretariat. 
The post of CEA, who acts as an adviser within the Commission, was set up in late 
2011 in response to calls for more independent monitoring in order to support a 
uniform application of the rules. The role of the European Fiscal Board will be to contribute, in an advisory capacity, to multilateral fiscal surveillance in the euro area. 
First, it will provide the European Commission with an assessment of the implementation of the  EU fiscal framework, particularly with regard to the horizontal consistency of decisions and the implementation of budgetary surveillance in cases where there is 
a risk of serious non-compliance with the rules. The European Fiscal Board may also 
make suggestions for the future evolution of the EU fiscal framework. Second, the Board will advise the Commission on the appropriateness of the prospective fiscal stance at the euro area and the national levels, based on an economic judgement. Third, it will cooperate with the national fiscal councils, notably with a view to exchanging best practices and facilitating common understandings. The European Fiscal Board will need a strong public voice for it to operate effectively. 
This is envisaged in the Five Presidents™ Report and will be an essential 
aspect of increasing the transparency and consistency of the implementation of the 
SGP rules.
 The Commission Decision does not explicitly provide for the European Fiscal Board™s assessments to be published in real time and makes no mention of the 
possibility for it to issue public opinions. The same is true for the ﬁcomply or explainﬂ 
principle spelled out in the Five Presidents™ Report. The Commission Decision 
implies that the Board will mainly provide its advice and evaluations only directly to the Commission, although it does not specify how these would feed into the internal decision-making process. While it is unclear whether or not the European Fiscal 
Board will communicate publicly in real time, there is a reference to the publication of an annual report. It will be important that the set-up of the European Fiscal Board follows the 
principles established in the context of the creation of independent bodies (like fiscal councils) at the national level. The Five Presidents™ Report states 
that the same standard of independence that applies to the national fiscal councils 
should apply to the European Fiscal Board. The Commission Decision grants 

independence to the five members of the Board, although they will all be appointed and remunerated by the Commission. In addition, the creation of the European Fiscal Board on the basis of a Commission decision within its organisational structure is not in line with the standards established for its counterparts at the national level.Overall, the establishment of the European Fiscal Board is a step in the 
right direction. Its mandate and institutional independence could be clarified 
and strengthened further to ensure that it can play an important role in increasing 
31transparency and improving compliance with the fiscal rules. First, since having 
a public voice is essential for the European Fiscal Board to be effective, it will be 
important that its right to publish is not limited to an annual report. In particular, 
the Board should be able to provide and publish assessments of the European 
Commission™s SGP-related decisions in real time. Second, it should now be clarified 
how the advice of the Board will feed into the fiscal surveillance framework at the 
European level, for example by giving the Chair of the European Fiscal Board 
the right to make submissions in the European Parliament and at the relevant 

Council/Eurogroup meetings. In this context, the Commission Œ in the event that 
it deviates from the Board™s advice on a particular matter Œ could commit to giving 
justifiable reasons for doing so. Third, it will be important to spell out the mandate 
of the European Fiscal Board, in particular with regard to the interplay between its 
assessment of the application of the SGP and its assessment of the prospective fiscal 

stance. While the former can build on well-established methodological foundations, 
this is not the case for the assessment of the appropriateness of the fiscal stance, 
notably at the euro area level. In this context, it will be important to ensure that SGP 
compliance in all Member States and debt sustainability risks form key elements of the 
assessment of the fiscal stance. Lastly, the institutional set-up of the European Fiscal 
Board could be revised over time, notably with a view to removing the Board from the 
institutional structures of the Commission so that it can operate as an independent 

institution with its own legal personality.
32Articles  The transmission of the ECB™s recent 

non-standard monetary policy measuresThis article evaluates the transmission through bank intermediation, bank lending and money of the ECB™s non-standard measures announced since June
 2014, namely the credit easing package, focusing on the targeted longer-term refinancing 
operations (TLTROs), and the expanded asset purchase programme (APP), focusing 
on the public sector purchase programme (PSPP). The results presented suggest that these measures have significantly lowered yields in a broad set of financial market segments, with the effects generally increasing with maturity and riskiness. Both programmes have contributed to a reduction in banks™ funding costs, which has 

incentivised them to pass on the cost relief to final borrowers by granting more credit at better conditions. Overall, the improved credit conditions in the euro area have helped push the monetary policy accommodation through the intermediation chain to reach households and firms.1 IntroductionSince the onset of the financial crisis, the ECB and all other major central banks have complemented their operating frameworks with an array of non-standard monetary policy measures. In ﬁnormalﬂ times, the ECB pursues its price stability mandate by setting the price for central bank reserves, thereby steering short-term money market interest rates so as to reflect its intended monetary policy stance. This monetary policy signal is then propagated through the financial 
system, influencing broader financing conditions and, ultimately, macroeconomic 
developments. During the financial crisis, this standard operating framework proved 
insufficient for two main reasons. First, dislocations in some financial market 
segments were impairing the mechanism through which the monetary policy stance is transmitted from the price of central bank reserves Œ which is controlled by the central bank Œ to broader financing conditions that affect investment and 
consumption decisions of firms and households. Second, the duration and severity 
of the global financial crisis led to the scope for providing monetary stimulus to the economy by reducing nominal short-term money market rates being exhausted, as these rates reached their effective lower bound. 
The aim of the non-standard measures introduced by the ECB before June 2014 was to remedy impairments in various stages of the transmission mechanism. These measures ranged from the flexible provision of liquidity to 
the banking system according to demand, with extended maturities and also in currencies other than the euro, to conducting outright purchases of assets in 33malfunctioning market segments.1 What they have in common is that they were not intended to alter the ECB™s monetary policy stance, but rather to ensure that it 
is duly transmitted to the economy by addressing impairments in the transmission mechanism.2Starting in June 2014 a series of new measures was gradually introduced, 
which constitute a package of credit easing policies. The aim of these measures 
was to enhance the transmission of monetary policy but also to reinforce the 
accommodative monetary policy stance in view of the persistently weak inflation outlook, slowing growth momentum and subdued monetary and credit dynamics at the time. Since the original way that non-standard measures had been conducted Œ by providing a backstop for banks™ liquidity needs Œ had become less suitable as 
banks entered a new phase of active deleveraging, new incentives for banks to 
resume their lending activities were required. In June 2014 the ECB announced the introduction of the TLTROs. These allow banks to borrow from the Eurosystem 
at fixed interest rates for a period of up to four years in a series of eight operations conducted at quarterly intervals starting in September 2014. Importantly, the 
amounts that banks can borrow are linked, for the first two TLTROs, to their stock of 

eligible loans (loans to euro area non-financial corporations (NFCs) and households, excluding loans to households for house purchase) as at 30 April 2014, and, for the remaining six operations, the evolution of eligible lending since May 2014.3 In addition, in the context of a broader reduction in the key ECB interest rates, the 
Governing Council decided in June 2014 for the first time to introduce a negative rate on the deposit facility and on reserves in excess of the minimum reserve requirements. The rate was further lowered in September
 2014 to its current level of -0.20%. In September 2014 the ECB also announced the launch of two asset purchase programmes, the asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP) and the third covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3). Finally, in January
 2015 the ECB announced the introduction of the expanded APP in order to further ease the monetary policy stance.
 This measure was 
deemed necessary as policy rates were constrained by the lower bound Œ the rate on the ECB™s main refinancing operations (MROs) had been set to
 0.05% since September 2014 Œ and the inflation outlook had deteriorated further since the introduction of the credit easing package. The expanded APP encompasses the 
two previously launched purchase programmes (the ABSPP and CBPP3) as well 

as purchases of public sector securities. The purchases under the programme, 
which amount to •60 billion per month, are intended to be carried out until the end of September 2016, or beyond, if necessary, and, in any case, until a sustained 
1 For a review of such measures, see the article entitled ﬁThe ECB™s response to the financial crisisﬂ, 
Monthly Bulletin, ECB, October 2010. For a more recent review, see the article entitled ﬁThe role of the central bank balance sheet in monetary policyﬂ, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, 2015.2 Starting in July 2013, the ECB also initiated a practice of offering explicit verbal guidance on the 

evolution of its policy in the future (ﬁforward guidanceﬂ), aimed at providing greater clarity about 
the Governing Council™s monetary policy orientation based on its assessment of the outlook for 
price stability, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of the ECB™s monetary policy in the prevailing 
circumstances. For more details, see the article entitled ﬁThe ECB™s forward guidanceﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, April 2014.3 For details on the modalities of the TLTROs, see the document entitled ﬁTargeted longer-term 

refinancing operations: updated modalitiesﬂ, available at: http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2014/html/pr140729_updated_modalities.pdf34adjustment is seen in the path of inflation consistent with the aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
4 This article discusses the impact on bank intermediation, bank lending 
and money of the non-standard measures introduced by the ECB since 
June 2014.5 A discussion of their impact on non-bank financial intermediaries 
as well as of the ultimate impact on economic activity and inflation is beyond the scope of this article. Section 2 analyses the impact of these measures on banks™ 
balance sheet developments, funding conditions and risk-bearing capacity with a view to establishing how they affect banks™ ability to act as financial intermediaries 
and thus be an effective conduit for the transmission of the monetary policy signal. 
Section 3 focuses more specifically on the effect of the measures on the outcome of 
the intermediation process, namely bank lending. Section 4 analyses the impact of 
the APP on broad money in view of the exogenous increase in the amount of central 
bank liquidity brought about by this measure. Section 5 concludes. The two boxes 
provide a stylised overview of the main transmission channels for these measures (Box 1) and their impact on various financial market prices (Box 2).Box 1 Transmission channels for non-standard measures
While the non-standard measures introduced by the ECB since June 2014 are relatively diverse in nature, the broad transmission channels through which they are expected to affect the economy are similar, albeit activated to varying degrees by the different measures.
 A large body of literature, focusing primarily on asset purchase programmes, has identified a 
number of possible channels through which non-standard measures might influence inflation and output. Borrowing from this literature, this box focuses on three main channels of transmission, namely the direct pass-through, portfolio rebalancing and signalling channels.First, via the direct pass-through channel, the non-standard measures are expected to ease borrowing conditions in the private non-financial sector by easing banks™ 
refinancing conditions, thereby encouraging borrowing and expenditure for investment and consumption. This channel is perhaps most prominent in the case of the TLTROs, which are 
designed to reduce banks™ marginal cost of funding for the targeted lending activity. The targeting 
features of the TLTROs incentivise banks to increase their supply of specific types of net lending 
to the real economy, which ensures that at least part of the funding cost benefit is passed on to 

borrowers. Moreover, as TLTROs allow banks to replace market-based bank funding with borrowing 
from the central bank, they can result in a reduction in the supply of bank bonds in the economy. 

The scarcity of bank bond issuance should translate into lower yields on bank bonds, including those issued by intermediaries not participating in the TLTROs. Asset purchases, particularly of the 
type included in the credit easing package, can also affect the credit conditions faced by the private 
sector. Central bank purchases increase the price of the targeted covered bonds and asset-backed 
securities: this encourages banks to increase their supply of loans that can be securitised, which 
tends to lower bank lending rates.4 For more details, see the box entitled ﬁThe Governing Council™s expanded asset purchase programmeﬂ, 
Economic Bulletin, Issue 1, ECB, 2015.5 The cut-off date for data in this article was 25 September 2015.35Second, via the portfolio rebalancing channel, yields on a broad range of assets are lowered. Asset purchases by the central bank result in an increase in the liquidity holdings of the sellers of 
these assets. If the liquidity received is not considered a perfect substitute for the assets sold, the 
asset swap can lead to a rebalancing of portfolios towards other assets. Through a chain of such 
portfolio rebalancing attempts, asset prices rise until a new equilibrium is reached, implying lower 
yields and costs of external financing. The theoretical underpinnings of this channel date back at least 
to the 1960s.6 Portfolio rebalancing may support the expansion of bank lending, as the compression 
of yields on securities renders lending a relatively more attractive proposition. The increased supply 

of bank lending lowers its cost. Portfolio rebalancing could in part entail increased holdings of external 
assets by euro area residents or repatriation of funds by non-residents, thereby exerting downward 
pressure on the foreign exchange value of the euro. Portfolio rebalancing effects can also be activated 
by the TLTROs, as the amounts that banks can borrow are a multiple of their eligible lending, which 
allows them to also finance purchases of assets such as government and private sector securities. 
Moreover, the repayment Œ rather than roll-over Œ of maturing bank bonds by banks participating in the 

TLTROs is likely to trigger portfolio rebalancing by the holders of these bonds. The empirical importance 
of this channel has been tested in works focusing mainly on the financial market impact of quantitative 
easing policies. Most of the studies have found evidence supporting the relevance of this channel.7Third, via the signalling channel, the deployment of non-standard measures, particularly 

those that have a sizeable effect on the central bank™s balance sheet, serves to underscore 
the monetary authority™s commitment to its mandate.
8 This can have two effects. First, it can 
trigger a downward revision of market expectations for future short-term interest rates. In the case of 

the ECB™s asset purchase programmes, this is because of the long period of ample liquidity implied 
by the maturity profile of the assets purchased. In the case of the TLTROs, this is related to the fixed 
rate of the operations and their long maturity, which was four years for the initial operations. Second, 
it may anchor or, as the case may be, increase inflation expectations. The result is that real 
 long-term rates will be lower, thereby supporting investment and consumption. Past studies have 

found that the contribution of the signalling channel is highly uncertain. It has been found to be 

muted in the United Kingdom, moderate in the euro area and highly uncertain in the United States, 
for which estimates have ranged from 10% to 50% of the total decline in Treasury yields.
96 See Tobin, J., ﬁMoney, Capital, and Other Stores of Valueﬂ, American Economic Review, Papers and 
Proceedings of the Seventy-Third Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Vol. 51, 

No 2, 1961, pp. 26-37; Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A.J., ﬁMoney and Business Cyclesﬂ, Review of 

Economics and Statistics, Vol. 45, No 1, 1963, pp. 32-64; Brunner, K. and Meltzer, A.H., ﬁMr Hicks and the 

‚Monetarists™ﬂ, Economica, Vol. 40, No 157, 1973, pp. 44-59; and Vayanos, D. and Vila, J.-L., ﬁA Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest Ratesﬂ, NBER Working Paper Series No 15487, 2009.7 For evidence in relation to the euro area, see Altavilla C., Carboni G. and Motto, R., ﬁAsset purchase 

programmes and financial markets: lessons from the euro areaﬂ, Working Paper Series, ECB, forthcoming. For the United Kingdom, see Joyce, M., Lasaosa, A., Stevens, I. and Tong, M., ﬁThe 
Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdomﬂ, International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 7, No 3, 2011, pp. 113-61. For the United States, see Gagnon, J., Raskin, M., Remache, J. and Sack, B., ﬁThe Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve™s Large-Scale 
Asset Purchasesﬂ, International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 7, No 1, 2011, pp. 3-43. See also D™Amico, S., English, W., López-Salido, J.D. and Nelson, E., ﬁThe Federal Reserve™s Large-Scale 
Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effectsﬂ, Economic Journal, Vol. 122, 2012, pp. 415-46.8 For a discussion on the implications of the measures for the balance sheet of the Eurosystem, see
 the 
article entitled ﬁThe role of the central bank balance sheet in monetary policyﬂ, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, 2015.9 See Krishnamurthy, A. and Vissing-Jorgensen, A., ﬁThe Ins and Outs of LSAPsﬂ, 
Proceedings - 
Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2013; Bauer, M.D. and Rudebusch, G.D., ﬁThe Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchasesﬂ, International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 10, No 3, 2014, pp. 233-289; and Christensen, J.H.E. and  Rudebusch, G.D., ﬁThe Response of Interest Rates to US and UK Quantitative Easingﬂ, The Economic Journal, Vol. 122, No 564, 2012, pp. F385-F414.362 The impact on bank intermediation 
The ECB™s non-standard measures interact in intricate and often far-reaching 
ways with banks™ intermediation processes and capacities by influencing their 
balance sheet developments, funding conditions and risk-bearing capacity.
 This section discusses some of the main aspects of this interaction in the case of the TLTROs and the APP in order to ascertain how these measures affect banks™ ability 
to act as effective conduits for the transmission of the monetary policy signal.
2.1 Banks™ use of the TLTROs
The TLT
ROs are intended to impact on the balance sheets of the borrowing 
banks in two main complementary ways. First, the TLTROs provide an incentive 
for asset expansion, particularly in terms of lending to firms and households, in line 
with the targeted nature of the measure. Given that the amounts that banks can borrow from the TLTROs are a multiple of their eligible lending, they also allow banks 
to fund other asset expansion strategies, involving asset classes beyond eligible loans. Second, as an attractive source of long-term funding the TLTROs are intended 
to allow banks to replace more costly sources of funding and extend the maturity of 
their liabilities in order to better match that of the lending targeted by the measure.Bank asset expansion has indeed taken place over the period during which TLT
ROs have been conducted although it has been centred on countries that are currently considered less vulnerable.10 It is important that the asset expansion that may have been encouraged by the TLTROs be assessed against 

a counterfactual path for an increase in bank balance sheets that would have materialised in the absence of this measure. While such a path is elusive, it should be recalled that when the operations were launched some banks in the euro area, and entire banking systems in certain vulnerable countries, were facing the need to deleverage, which in some cases was even formalised in restructuring plans. Chart 1 shows the changes in the main balance sheet items of banks that borrowed 
in the TLTROs between end-August
 2014 (before the first TLTRO was conducted) 
and end-July 2015. Clearly, the movements on these banks™ balance sheets are 
also affected by numerous other factors and considerations not related to the 
TLTROs, which cannot be parsed out in this simple illustration. These developments 
should therefore be interpreted with caution and in conjunction with complementary 
evidence. Chart 1 shows that TLTRO borrowers expanded their credit to the private 
sector over this period. It should be noted, however, that this outcome is entirely 
driven by banks in countries that are currently considered less vulnerable. In vulnerable countries, by contrast, credit provided to the private sector by TLTRO 
borrowers continued to decline, reflecting the ongoing deleveraging process in these countries. Across vulnerable and less vulnerable countries, TLTRO borrowers 
10 Throughout this article the term ﬁvulnerable countriesﬂ refers to Ireland, Greece, Spain, Italy, Cyprus, 
Portugal and Slovenia, while the term ﬁless vulnerable countriesﬂ refers to the remaining euro area 
countries.37acquired external assets in net terms, while the overall change in their provision of credit to euro area sovereigns was muted.11 There is no evidence that TLTRO 
borrowers, in aggregate, distributed the liquidity they obtained to other banks, as credit to monetary financial institutions (MFIs) contracted. While Chart 1 documents some ﬁparkingﬂ of funds in Eurosystem deposits by TLTRO borrowers, it should be 
recalled that the expanded APP was launched in the last part of the period covered, 
which resulted in a large, steady increase in central bank reserves in the system.The funding substitution that has taken place as a result of the TLT
ROs has resulted in a significant extension of the maturity of bank funding. TLTRO 
borrowers have sharply reduced their recourse to other Eurosystem borrowing (see Chart 1). This reflects the fact that the three-year long-term refinancing 
operations that were conducted in December 2011
 and February 2012 matured in, respectively, January and February
 2015, as well as the fact that banks switched borrowing from other operations (three-month longer-term refinancing operations and 

MROs) to the TLTROs. Overall, this has resulted in a substantial extension of the 
weighted average maturity of bank borrowing from the Eurosystem, from 130 days before the first TLTRO was conducted to
 804 days after the settlement of the fourth TLTRO in June
 2015.12 This extension of maturity provides banks with funding 
certainty over a longer period and allows them to better match the maturity of 
their liabilities with that of assets such as loans to households and firms. TLTRO 
borrowers have also reduced their recourse to wholesale funding, i.e. issuance of 11 The increase in net external assets mainly reflects the intermediation of bank clients™ external 
transactions and is thus predominantly not an active portfolio decision by banks. This notwithstanding, 
gross external assets also increased over this period.12 This illustrative calculation assumes that all TLTROs are repaid on their final maturity in 

September 2018 and are not subject to voluntary or mandatory early repayment.Chart 1Changes in the balance sheets of banks participating in the TLTROs
(EUR billions)-300-200-1000100200300400other Eurosystemborrowingdepositswholesale fundingcredit to theprivate sectorcredit togovernmentcredit to MFIsdeposits withthe Eurosystemexternalassets (net)otherTLTROs funding substitutionasset expansionSources: ECB and ECB calculations.

individual balance sheet information is available. ﬁWholesale fundingﬂ refers to the issuance of debt securities and borrowing from MFIs.38debt securities and interbank borrowing. Indeed, there is evidence that the reduced recourse to the issuance of 
debt securities is, in aggregate terms, more pronounced in the case of TLTRO borrowers than for other banks. 
While the reduction of debt securities, particularly of the unsecured type, would be the most cost-effective type 
of funding substitution, the reduction of outstanding debt securities is constrained by the roll-off rate implied 

by their maturity structure as well as by business considerations supporting a continued issuing presence in the market. In this context, other policy measures taken by the ECB over this period, and the CBPP3 in particular, have supported banks™ continued issuance 

activity in the covered bond market.Looking ahead, banks have signalled that they 
expect to mobilise more of the TLT
RO funds 
borrowed in order to extend loans. In their responses 
to the July 2015 euro area bank lending survey (BLS) 
banks indicated that in future TLTROs they expect that 
more of the funds drawn will be deployed to grant loans 
and less to acquire other assets (see the left-hand 
 panel of Chart 2). As regards funding substitution, banks 
expect that the replacement of funding from other Eurosystem operations will become 

less important (see the right-hand panel of Chart 2), which is unsurprising given the 
extent to which TLTROs have replaced other Eurosystem operations thus far. 
2.2  
The impact of the ECB™s non-standard measures on banks™ access 
to market financingThe ECB™s non-standard measures have also 
improved broader market financing conditions for banks, regardless of their participation in Eurosystem borrowing operations. The replacement of more costly and shorter-dated funding sources with 
TLTROs is only one part of the easing effect of the 
TLTROs on bank funding conditions and, ultimately, the 
cost of funding for firms and households. The TLTROs, 

along with the other standard and non-standard measures introduced by the ECB since June 2014, and the APP in particular, have precipitated a substantial 
compression of medium and long-term yields on a number of financial assets, including bank funding 
instruments (see Box 2). As a result, the composite cost 
of debt financing for banks has decreased markedly across euro area countries (see Chart 3). Moreover, 
the cross-country dispersion of this cost has continued Chart 2Use of funds from the TLTROs as reported in the 
July 2015 bank lending survey (BLS)(percentages of respondents)02040
60
80100
120020
40
60
80100
120past TLTROsfuture TLTROspast TLTROsfuture TLTROsuse of fundssubstitution of funding sourcespurchasing assets granting loans 
refinancing interbank lending 
maturing debt deposit shortfalls other Eurosystemoperations Source: ECB.
Notes: ﬁPast TLTROsﬂ refers to all TLTROs which took place up to June 2015 and 

ﬁfuture TLTROsﬂ refers to operations beyond this point. Values displayed in the chart 

are the sum of the percentages of banks responding ﬁhas contributed or will contribute 
considerablyﬂ and ﬁhas contributed or will contribute somewhatﬂ to the corresponding 
question in the BLS. The results shown are calculated as a percentage of the number 
of banks that did not reply ﬁnot applicableﬂ. Respondents may indicate that the TLTROs 
have contributed or will contribute to more than one use.Chart 3Composite cost of bank deposit and bond financing (percentages per annum) 01
2
345
6
7TLTROABSPP and CBPP3expanded APP20072009201120132015Germany Spain 
France Italy euro area Sources: ECB, Merrill Lynch Global Index and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Average of deposit rates on new business and cost of market debt funding 

weighted with their corresponding outstanding amounts. Vertical lines denote the 

announcement dates of the respective measures. The latest observation is for July 2015.
39to decline. The improvements have resulted in a 
broader easing of financing conditions, which applies to banks regardless of the volume of their recourse to the Eurosystem™s lending operations. The role of the 
ECB™s non-standard measures as a driver of these 
developments is confirmed by banks™ responses to the 
BLS (see Chart 4). Around one-quarter of respondents 
in the July 2015 survey indicated that the TLTROs 

have contributed to easing the conditions they face when accessing market financing. As expected, the 
positive impact is more widespread in the case of the APP: almost half of the banks participating in the 
April 2015 survey identified a positive effect on market 

financing conditions in the six months to March.13 In terms of specific instruments, the positive impact was reported to be more widespread in the case of funding via covered and unsecured bank bonds.2.3  
The accommodation of the reserves 
created by the APP on bank balance 
sheetsAsset purchases by the Eurosystem in the context of the APP are also having profound effects on 
banks™ balance sheets.
 The Eurosystem pays for the 

assets it purchases by supplying reserves, i.e. deposits with the Eurosystem. Since credit institutions are the entities that typically hold 
deposit accounts with the central bank,14 purchases are always settled through them, regardless of who the ultimate seller is. The accommodation of these reserves on 
banks™ balance sheets is associated with movements in other balance sheet items. 
It is expected that this will eventually trigger portfolio rebalancing by banks, whereby they exchange the reserves they receive for other assets.The increase in reserves following the introduction of the expanded APP 
is matched on banks™ balance sheets by increases in deposits and, to a 
somewhat lesser extent, by sales of government bonds from banks™ own 
portfolios. The largest counterpart to the increase in holdings of reserves in the 
period during which the expanded APP has been active is an increase in deposits 
by euro area residents (see Chart 5), part of which reflects banks™ intermediation 
of bond sales to the Eurosystem by euro area non-banks. Their intermediation of 
sales by non-euro area residents is reflected in a decline in net external assets, which is also very sizeable. A somewhat smaller but still material part of the increase 
in holdings of reserves is matched by a decline in bank credit to governments, 13 These are the latest results available at the time of writing for the question on the APP, which is 
included in the BLS on a semi-annual basis.14 Certain other entities, such as governments or government agencies, also hold deposit accounts with 

Eurosystem national central banks. Such entities, however, are not involved in intermediating sales of 
securities to the Eurosystem.Chart 4Improvement in market financing conditions for banks resulting from the TLTROs and the APP, as reported 
in the BLS(percentages of respondents; net percentages of respondents)past six monthsnext six monthsAPP010203040500102030
4050past TLTROsfuture TLTROsTLTROsmarket financing conditions ABSs covered bonds unsecured bank bonds equity issued total market financing conditions Source: ECB.Notes: ﬁPast TLTROsﬂ refers to all TLTROs which took place up to June 2015 and 

ﬁfuture TLTROsﬂ refers to operations beyond this point. Values displayed in the 

left-hand panel of the chart are the sum of the percentages of banks responding ﬁhas 
improved or will improve considerablyﬂ and ﬁhas improved or will improve somewhatﬂ 
to the corresponding question in the July 2015 BLS. Values displayed in the right-

hand panel of the chart are the difference between the sum of the percentages for 

ﬁincreased/improved considerablyﬂ and ﬁincreased/improved somewhatﬂ and the sum of the percentages for ﬁdecreased/deteriorated somewhatﬂ and ﬁdecreased/deteriorated considerablyﬂ, as reported in the April 2015 BLS. The results shown are calculated 

as a percentage of the number of banks that did not reply ﬁnot applicableﬂ.40which, at least partly, reflects sales of securities to the 
Eurosystem from banks™ own portfolios. Chart
 5 also shows an expansion of credit to the private sector, part 
of which will have also contributed to the increase in deposits discussed above.The final uses of the liquidity generated by the APP are likely to be different to the initial uses.
 The banking system as a whole cannot reduce the 
total amount of reserves it holds by engaging in portfolio rebalancing.15 Looking at aggregate data can therefore provide only limited insights into the use of the liquidity generated by the APP, as the liquidity being 
used by one bank will be matched by a movement on the balance sheet of the bank receiving the liquidity. 
However, survey evidence can shed some light on 
banks™ intentions. A large number of respondents to the 
April 2015 BLS said they expected to use the increased 
liquidity they receive to grant loans (see Chart 6). This response should be qualified, however, as 
the expansion of loans is a process that requires time to materialise, not only owing to operational considerations but also because the reaction of loan 
demand to improved supply conditions is unlikely to 15 A limited amount of reserve reabsorption can occur through the repayment of borrowing from the 
Eurosystem. Moreover, the acquisition of banknotes by banks also depletes the aggregate amount of 
reserves.Chart 6Intended use of additional liquidity arising from the APP, 
as reported in the April 2015 BLS
(percentages of respondents)01020304050refinancinggrantingloanspurchasingassetsrefinancinggrantingloanspurchasingassetsincreased liquidity from salesof marketable assetsincreased liquidity from increasedcustomer depositsnext six months Source: ECB.

contribute considerably to this purposeﬂ and ﬁwill contribute somewhat to this purposeﬂ 
to the corresponding question in the April 2015 BLS. The results shown are calculated 

as a percentage of the number of banks which did not reply ﬁnot applicableﬂ and refer 
to banks™ assessments for the forthcoming six months.
Chart 5Balance sheet movements of MFIs other than the Eurosystem that correspond to the change in reserve holdings between end-February and end-July 2015(EUR billions, not seasonally adjusted)200250300350
400450500550600outstanding amountof claimson the Eurosystem(February 2015) borrowing fromEurosystemwholesalefunding (net)deposit fundingcapital andreservescredit to theprivate sectorcredit togovernmentnet externalassetsoutstanding amountof claimson the Eurosystem(July 2015)otherSources: ECB and ECB calculations.Notes: Increases in net asset positions reduce claims on the Eurosystem. Increases in net liability positions increase claims on the Eurosystem. ﬁWholesale funding (net)ﬂ refers 
to issuance of debt securities net of holdings of MFI debt securities and borrowing from MFIs other than the Eurosystem net of deposits with MFIs other than the Eurosystem.41be instantaneous. It is therefore probable that the first stage of rebalancing will affect mainly the liabilities side 
of banks™ balance sheets, as banks use the increased 
liquidity at their disposal to pay down their more costly liabilities. This initial stage is also likely to involve the 
acquisition of some liquid assets, which can be done swiftly and with low transaction costs. Nevertheless, both of these types of immediate transaction contribute 
to activating portfolio rebalancing effects and are 
therefore congruent with the APP™s intended objectives.
The APP is expected to improve the attractiveness 
of loans compared with securities as regards banks™ portfolio allocation decisions.
 It is expected to impact on banks™ portfolio decisions by tilting the 

risk-adjusted return on assets in favour of loans. In 
recent years the returns that banks, particularly in vulnerable euro area countries, have earned (in ex-post risk-adjusted terms) by investing in securities have been much higher than those on investing in loans (see Chart 7). However, the portfolio rebalancing 
effects triggered by the APP will reduce the yields on 
securities. While these effects will also place downward 
pressure on loan rates, for banks™ bottom line profitability this will be counteracted 
by the lower credit risk of the loans, owing to the improving macroeconomic outlook. Overall, therefore, the APP is expected to make loans more attractive than securities.
2.4 The impact of the APP on bank profitability and capital
The APP also has implications for banks™ capacity to bear risk.
 Banks™ capital 
positions are of central relevance for their ability to intermediate and thus transmit the monetary policy accommodation engineered by the ECB™s non-standard 
measures. The accumulation of profits is one of the main methods that banks can 
use to boost their capital buffers and thereby increase their capacity to lend and 
take on the associated risks. The APP has several, partly competing effects on 
banks™ capital and profitability. The reduction in longer-term yields brought about by 
the APP in an environment where short-term rates are at or close to their effective 

lower bound implies a flattening of the yield curve. Given banks™ traditional business 
model of performing maturity transformation, i.e. funding the acquisition of long-term assets by issuing short-term liabilities, this yield constellation can exert downward pressure on their intermediation margins. At the same time, this adverse effect on 
bank profitability and capital is counteracted by the boosting effect of the APP on 

economic activity, which, as previously mentioned, moderates the credit risk of 
loans, thereby reducing the associated provisioning costs. Moreover, the general 
increase in asset prices expected to be triggered by the APP will lift the valuations of 
these assets on bank balance sheets, thus, under certain conditions, giving rise to capital gains.Chart 7Difference between the ex-post risk-adjusted returns 
on loans and those on securities in selected euro area countries(percentage points)-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1.5
2.0200620072008200920102011201220132014Italy and Spain other large euro area countries Sources: Bankscope and ECB calculations.Notes: Risk-adjusted return on loans (interest received from loans net of impairment 

securities. Weighted averages for an unbalanced panel of 186 banks. Yearly data. 

ﬁOther large euro area countriesﬂ comprises Germany, France and the Netherlands.
42Evidence from the BLS points to a positive overall effect of the APP on bank capital, but the 
impact on profitability is reported to vary across 
countries. Since some of the effects of the APP have 
opposing impacts on bank profitability and capital, the overall effect is ex ante unclear. According to 
the April
 2015 BLS, banks expect a slight overall improvement in their capital ratios resulting from 
the APP (see Chart
 8). This reflects a broad-based 
expectation of capital gains associated with the programme. However, as part of these capital gains are 
not reflected in banks™ accounting profits,
16 the negative effect of the APP on banks™ net interest margins 

dominates here, resulting in an adverse overall effect 
on bank profitability. While the impact on net interest 
margins is negative overall at the euro area level, the responses at the country level are more diverse. In particular, in vulnerable euro area countries where 
loans are often extended at floating rates and banks are 
most burdened by costs associated with credit quality, 
the impact is reported to be positive.Box 2The impact of non-standard measures on financial marketsThis box quantifies the effects of the ECB™s recent non-standard measures on financial 
asset prices. The main challenge in doing this is that the ECB™s announcements of both the 
TLTROs (June
 2014) and the expanded APP (January
 2015) were largely expected by financial 
markets, following a number of official ECB communications which indicated the possibility of 
further non-standard measures being introduced. According to theory, efficient markets should 
price in the impact of a policy measure in anticipation of its actual implementation. This reasoning 
implies that asset prices should react to TLTRO and APP-related news in anticipation of the 
official announcement itself, as market participants revise the likelihood of the programmes being 

introduced and their expected size. This box employs an event study methodology that extends the set of events to include official 
ECB announcements from May 2014 onwards which might have affected market expectations 
regarding the programmes. For the TLTROs, policy-related events include the Governing Council 
meetings of May and June 2014.17 For the APP a larger set of events has been identified, following 
the approach of Altavilla et al.
18 For each event, changes up to a two-day window in length are 
considered, so as to allow for possible slow reactions of asset prices in light of the novelty of the 
16 The extent to which capital gains are reflected in accounting profits depends on the accounting portfolio 
in which the relevant assets are held.17 The analysis associates the Governing Council meeting held on 8 May 2014 with the TLTROs in part 

because the President of the ECB explicitly stated during the press conference that the Governing 
Council was willing to act in the following month. As a result, the official announcement of the TLTROs 
in June 2014 was already partially priced in after this press conference. 18 See the first Working Paper cited in footnote 7.
Chart 8Expected impact of the APP on banks™ profitability 
and capital ratios, as reported in the April 2015 BLS
(net percentages of respondents)-60-40-200204060euro arealess vulnerablecountriesvulnerable countriesnet interest margin capital gains/losses 
profitability capital ratio Source: ECB.

the difference between the sum of the percentages of banks responding ﬁincreased/

improved considerablyﬂ and ﬁincreased/improved somewhatﬂ and the sum of the 
percentages for ﬁdecreased/deteriorated somewhatﬂ and ﬁdecreased/deteriorated 
considerablyﬂ to the corresponding question in the April 2015 BLS. The results shown 

are calculated as a percentage of the number of banks which did not reply ﬁnot 
applicableﬂ.43programmes. For this reason, this regression analysis explicitly controls for macroeconomic releases. 
Specifically, the estimates in the ﬁcontrolled event studyﬂ columns (see Table) are obtained by 
regressing the daily changes in yields on the selected event dummies and the surprise component 
of a wide set of macroeconomic releases. The analysis considers macroeconomic news for the euro 
area, the four largest euro area economies and the United States over the sample period, i.e. from 
the beginning of January 2014 to the end of March 2015. The ﬁstandard event studyﬂ columns contain 
estimates obtained without controlling for macroeconomic news. 
The results suggest that the combined effects of the non-standard measures implemented 
since June 2014 have significantly lowered yields in a broad set of financial market segments. 
The effects generally increase with maturity and riskiness. For instance, a sizeable impact is 
estimated for long-term sovereign bonds, with ten-year yields declining by about 70 basis points for 
the euro area, and roughly 100 basis points for Italy and Spain. The spillovers to yields of untargeted 
assets are significant in the case of euro area financial and non-financial corporate bonds.Table
Changes in yields of selected financial assets around policy event datesTLTROAPPStandard event studyControlled event studyStandard event studyControlled event studyThree-month EURIBOR (basis points)-4-4-5-310-year government bond (basis points)Euro area-22-23-48-47Germany-9-10-23-18France-17-18-36-27Italy-31-33-72-60Spain-29-31-69-65Bonds issued by financial corporations (basis points)AAA-14-14-13-7AA-13-13-15-11
A-15-14-18-14BBB-23-24-32-27Bonds issued by non-financial corporations (basis points)AAA-10-9-26-11
AA-10-10-20-12A-12-12-19-15BBB-15-15-19-23Bonds issued by banks (basis points)Euro area-16-16-26-22Germany-12-12-13-8France-13-13-17-11
Italy-26-26-56-59Spain-18-18-15-14Exchange rate (percentages)USD/EUR exchange rate-1-1-12-12Nominal effective exchange rate
-1-1-8-8Stock prices (percentages)
Dow Jones EURO STOXX (broad) index
2351Inflation swap rates (basis points)
One-year-11533Three-year231427Five-year231424Source: Reuters, Bloomberg and ECB calculations.Notes: The ten-year government bond yield for the euro area refers to an indicator constructed by the ECB using the Nelson-Siegel-Svensson model, which 

includes all issuers and all ratings. The nominal effective exchange rate of the euro used in the estimation is that against the currencies of the EER-19 group 

of trading partners (Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania, 

Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States). Bank bond yields are investment grade. For the TLTROs, the 
events are 8 May and 5 June 2015. For the APP, the exercise is based on 17 event dates. For 2014 the selected events are: 4, 12, 24 and 25 September; 2, 10 
and 24 October; 6, 17, 21 and 27 November and 4 December. For 2015 the events are 2, 8, 14 and 22 January and 5 March.
44There is also easing pressure on other financial market prices, such as the exchange rate 
and equity prices. As shown in the table, the APP announcements are estimated to have led to a 
depreciation of the euro by 12% against the US dollar. It is also estimated that there was a positive 
impact on the euro stock market index of 3% in the case of the TLTROs and
 1% in the case of the APP.
The results suggest that the APP has contributed to an increase in long-term inflation 
expectations. Inflation swap rates for maturities between one and five years are a measure of the private sector™s inflation expectations over the respective horizons. The estimated change 
in inflation swap rates due to the APP is around
 30 basis points for the one-year maturity and around 20 basis points for the five-year maturity. For the credit easing and asset purchase 
programmes to provide stimulus to the real economy, the response of inflation expectations is 
crucial: a decline in inflation expectations matching the decline in nominal yields would leave real interest rates unchanged. Moreover, the response of inflation expectations is a metric for gauging 

the credibility as perceived by financial markets of the asset purchase programme™s ability to 
address deflation risks. 3 The impact on bank lending From a monetary policy transmission perspective, banks™ intermediation 
capacity is relevant primarily because it affects the supply of bank loans to firms and households. This section therefore focuses more specifically on the 
effect of the ECB™s recent non-standard monetary policy measures on the eventual 

outcome of the intermediation process, namely on the availability, conditions, rates 
and volumes of bank lending. Evidence from lending rates applied by banks to NFCs points to an improvement in the pass-through of monetary policy measures. Data on individual MFI lending rates suggest that successive cuts in the MRO rate have 
been passed through to lending rates applied to NFCs to a different extent across 

countries (see Charts 9 and 10). Looking at the distributions of lending rates charged by MFIs to firms in September 2011 (i.e. shortly before the first of a series 
of cuts in the MRO rate starting in November 2011) and June
 2014, it appears that the 125 basis point reduction in the MRO rate over this period was incompletely and unevenly reflected in the decline in the median lending rate: in the group of 
less vulnerable countries it declined by 92 basis points, whereas in the group of vulnerable countries it declined by only 28 basis points. Before, therefore, the launch of the credit easing package, and especially in vulnerable countries, the bulk of the reduction in the key ECB interest rates had not been transmitted to the borrowing costs faced by households and firms. In the period after the announcement of the credit easing package in June 2014, however, the reduction in borrowing costs was 
larger in vulnerable countries (113
 basis points) than in less vulnerable countries 
(50 basis points), suggesting that both the TLTROs and the APP have supported 
credit flows to the private sector and aligned the price of such credit with the intended stance of monetary policy. 
45A simplified accounting model of how banks price their loans can be used to analyse the main factors that influence lending rates. Using such a model, it is possible to break down lending rates into four main components:19Lending rate = bank funding cost + capital charge + intermediation margin + other factorsThis simplified model assumes that when pricing a loan, the base used by banks is a market reference rate which mainly reflects the rate at which they can raise 
funds in the interbank money market. In addition to this rate, banks pass on to the final borrower a number of spreads to recover the costs they incur in making the loan, including the cost of funding through deposits and market debt (bank funding cost). Moreover, banks need to recoup their cost of equity (capital charge). When 
a new loan is created, the regulatory risk weight is positive, so the bank has to set aside some capital to back the loan.20 Banks also charge a margin for intermediation services (intermediation margin). This margin has to compensate the bank for 

a number of factors related to the riskiness of the borrower and it generates net earnings from borrowing activity. Finally, there are other factors not considered 
separately in this simple formula (other factors), which may influence, sometimes substantially, the pricing of banks™ retail products. These include changes in demand 
19 The factors driving banks™ costs of funding enter into the breakdown in terms of spreads relative to 
the risk-free market rate of the closest maturities. For example, the deposit spread is often negative 
because banks provide liquidity services to depositors. So the deposit rate is very low, and can even be 
lower than the overnight index swap (OIS) rate.20 The cost of capital can be approximated by multiplying the excess return on bank equity by a coefficient 

of capital consumption.Chart 9Composite lending rates for NFCs: distribution of individual MFIs in vulnerable countries(percentages per annum)0.0 0.2 
0.4 0.6 012345678July 2015 (median = 2.48) June 2014 (median = 3.61) September 2011 (median = 3.89) 2.44    MRO  3.89 Source: ECB. Note: The chart shows the density approximation of the lending rate distribution 
obtained from a sample of 55 MFIs in selected vulnerable countries (Ireland, 

Spain, Italy and Portugal) in three different periods (September 2011, June 2014 

and July 2015). The chart also shows that if the reduction in the MRO rate since 

September 2011 (i.e. 145 basis points) had been fully passed on to the median 

lending rate of that period (i.e. 3.89%), the lending rate in July 2015 would have 

been 2.44%.Chart 10Composite lending rates for NFCs: distribution of individual MFIs in less vulnerable countries(percentages per annum)0.000.250.50
0.751.00012345678July 2015 (median = 1.79) June 2014 (median = 2.29) September 2011 (median = 3.21) 1.76  MRO  3.21 Source: ECB. Note: The chart shows the density approximation of the lending rate distribution 

obtained from a sample of 105 MFIs in selected less vulnerable countries (Belgium, 
Germany, France, the Netherlands and Austria) in three different periods 
(September 2011, June 2014 and July 2015). The chart also shows that if the reduction 
in the MRO rate since September 2011 (i.e. 145 basis points) had been fully passed 

on to the median lending rate of that period (i.e. 3.21%), the lending rate in July 2015 
would have been 1.76%.46for loans, banking sector competition and the opportunity costs of lending (most notably taking into account incentives for holding sovereign debt). 21 Lending rates were exceptionally sticky and sluggish between 2011
 and 2014, 
especially in vulnerable countries. This occurred despite the fact that after the 
announcement of Outright Monetary Transactions in August
 2012, monetary policy 
was successful in compressing funding costs and even the cost of capital for banks (see Chart 11).
The costs of borrowing from capital markets (i.e. bank bond spreads) have been higher in vulnerable than in less vulnerable euro area countries, especially during the period 2011-12.
 This difference reflects the higher 

opportunity cost of investing in securities issued by banks operating in vulnerable countries, where sovereign yields are higher. Additionally, the deterioration in 
sovereign creditworthiness as a result of the sovereign debt crisis has had a significant effect on the credit risk of banks operating in vulnerable countries, where 
high exposure to domestic sovereign bonds has adversely influenced their funding 
costs.22 Against the background of additional monetary policy measures and 
especially after the announcement of the credit easing package, there has 
been a steep decline in lending rates. This decline has been influenced by different factors, including the further reduction in money market rates, which 
21 Note that this simplified pricing formula cannot be directly translated into single measures of bank 
refinancing costs, risk spreads and capital charges, although several proxies are available for each. 
Consequently, the breakdown is illustrative only and is not robust to the choice of these proxies, which 
is surrounded by a high degree of uncertainty.22 See Altavilla C., Pagano M. and Simonelli, S., ﬁBank Exposures and Sovereign Stress Transmissionﬂ, 

CSEF Working Paper, No 410, 2015, and Acharya, V., Drechsler, I. and Schnabl, P., ﬁA Pyrrhic Victory? 

Bank Bailouts and Sovereign Credit Riskﬂ, Journal of Finance Vol. 69, Issue 6, 2014, pp. 2689-2739.Chart 11
Breakdown of the composite cost of borrowing for NFCs in vulnerable countries(percentages per annum)a) in vulnerable countriesb) in less vulnerable countries-3-2-101234
56782003200520072009201120132015market rate bank bond spreads deposit spreads capital charges expected losses margin and other factors MFI lending rate for NFCs -3-2-101
2
3
4
567
82003200520072009201120132015market rate bank bond spreads deposit spreads capital charges expected losses margin and other factors MFI lending rate for NFCs Sources: ECB, Moody™s and Merrill Lynch Global Index.
Notes: ﬁMarket rateﬂ is the two-year overnight index swap (OIS) rate. ﬁDeposit spreadsﬂ are computed in relation to an average of overnight deposits, deposits with agreed maturity 
and deposits redeemable at notice, weighted by their corresponding new business volumes. The spreads are calculated vis-à-vis the EURIBOR of the closest maturity. Yields for 

ﬁbank bond spreadsﬂ are taken from the Merrill Lynch Global Index and aggregated on the basis of their corresponding outstanding amounts. The spreads are then calculated 

vis-à-vis the swap rate of the closest maturity. ﬁCapital chargesﬂ are the cost of the capital required by Basel II regulations. ﬁExpected lossesﬂ = LGD*PD, where PD (probability of 



lending rates and all of the other components.47have entered into negative territory. Another part of 
the decline in lending rates is due to the shrinking of the residual component linked to ﬁmargins and other factorsﬂ, especially in vulnerable countries. These 
dynamics are in line with the main objective of the TLTROs, which is to stimulate the supply of bank loans, 
thereby exerting downward pressure on lending rates in order to attract more demand, expand operations 
and contribute to a more robust recovery. A better 
business environment will ultimately be reflected in an improvement in banks™ profitability.
Analysing the bidding of banks in TLT
ROs suggests that there is a close relationship between participation in these operations and lending behaviour, especially in vulnerable countries.
 Banks located in vulnerable countries which have participated in at least one of the first four TLTROs have lowered 
their lending rates by more than non-participants (see Chart 12). Lending volumes also provide evidence of more forthcoming lending behaviour by these banks. The lending behaviour of banks located in less 
vulnerable countries does not appear to be significantly 
linked to TLTRO participation.
Euro area banks™ answers to ad hoc questions 
in the April 2015 BLS provide information on the potential ability of the APP to affect banks™ lending 
behaviour.
23 The majority of banks in the euro area 
indicated a positive impact of the APP on all loan 
categories, especially as regards their credit terms and conditions and, to a lesser extent, credit standards. A net percentage of around
 5% of the banks reported a likely easing impact on the credit standards applied to loans to enterprises and to households for house purchase over the coming six months (see Chart 13). 
The positive impact on consumer credit and other loans was seen as more muted. Considerable net percentages of the banks indicated a favourable impact of the APP on their credit terms and conditions for 
loans to enterprises (-19%), housing loans (-15%), 
and consumer credit and other lending to households (-8%). This favourable impact was expected to increase 
over time for loans to enterprises (-33%), housing loans (-23%), and consumer credit and other lending to households (-14%). 23 These results were collected in the April 2015 BLS, for which the deadline for banks to respond was 
23 March. The answers should thus be seen as representative of the information that these banks had 
at that time. Chart 13Impact of the expanded APP on bank lending 
conditions as reported in the April 2015 BLS
(net percentages of respondents)-35-30
-25-20-15-10-505enterpriseshouseholdsfor housepurchaseconsumercreditand otherlendingenterpriseshouseholdsfor housepurchaseconsumercreditand otherlendingimpact on credit standards impact on terms and conditions past six months next six months Source: ECB.

percentages of banks responding ﬁtightened considerablyﬂ and ﬁtightened somewhatﬂ 
to the corresponding question in the April 2015 BLS and the sum of the percentages 

responding ﬁeased somewhatﬂ and ﬁeased considerablyﬂ. The results are calculated 
as a percentage of banks which did not reply ﬁnot applicableﬂ. A positive value indicates 
net tightening and a negative value indicates net easing.Chart 12Changes in lending rates for NFCs(percentage points)-1.75-1.50-1.25-1.00
-0.75-0.50-0.250.00
0.25non-bidders in TLTROsbidders in any TLTROnon-bidders in TLTROsbidders in any TLTROvulnerable countriesless vulnerable countriesinterquartile range median Source ECB. Notes: The chart covers the period from June 2014 to July 2015. In ﬁvulnerableﬂ 

countries the ﬁnon-bidders in TLTROsﬂ group comprises ten banks and the ﬁbidders 

in any TLTROﬂ group comprises 49 banks. In ﬁless vulnerableﬂ countries the 

ﬁnon-bidders in TLTROsﬂ group comprises 71 banks and the ﬁbidders in any TLTROﬂ 

group comprises 43 banks.484 The impact on moneyThe APP is unique among the ECB™s non-standard measures in that it entails 
an exogenous increase in the amount of monetary liquidity in the economy.
 The 
ECB™s non-standard measures discussed in this article are intended to contribute to 
achieving its primary mandate of maintaining price stability over the medium term, 
mainly by easing financing conditions for firms and 

households. Part of the expected reaction by these 
economic agents to the more forthcoming financing 
conditions is that they will increase their borrowing from 

the banking system in order to finance expenditure. 
The associated credit expansion results in an increase 
in broad money, as loan drawdowns are typically 
carried out by crediting the borrower™s deposit account 
(and ultimately that of the recipient of the borrower™s 

expenditure). The upshot is that all these non-standard 
measures ultimately have an impact on broad money 
creation. Indeed, measures of broad money growth have 
been moving upwards over the period during which the 
recent wave of non-standard measures has been active 
(see Chart 14). In most cases this impact is indirect and 
reflects the endogenous reaction of banks, firms and 

households to the easier financing conditions engineered 
by the central bank. The APP, however, is distinctly 
different in this respect. As explained in Section
 2, when 
the Eurosystem acquires securities, this always leads 
to an increase of the reserves which euro area MFIs 
hold with the Eurosystem. When the ultimate sellers of 
the securities are non-MFIs, the increase in central bank reserves is matched by an 
increase in the deposits of the seller with the credit institution which intermediated the 
sale. In view of the uniqueness of the APP in this respect, this section focuses on the 
impact of the APP on monetary aggregates.
4.1 Conceptual delineation of the impact
Two effects of the 
APP purchases on broad money (
M3) can be distinguished: the direct, mechanical effect of the purchases, and the indirect effect resulting from the uses of the liquidity from the purchases.
 As regards the direct effect, the 
impact on M3 depends on the sector to which the ultimate sellers of the securities acquired by the Eurosystem belong.Direct effects of the APP on 
M3 arise when purchases are made from the euro area money-holding sector.
 For sellers in the euro area money-holding sector Œ euro area households, NFCs, insurance corporations and pension funds, other financial intermediaries and general government entities other than central government Œ the purchases result, in the first instance, in a one-for-one direct Chart 14Annual growth rates of M1 and M3(annual percentage changes)-20246
810
1214201020112012201320142015M1 M3 credit easing expandedAPPSource: ECB.Notes: The vertical lines denote the announcement of the TLTROs (marking the 
initiation of the credit easing package) and the APP, respectively.
49increase in M3.24 In the case of sellers which are not resident in the euro area, the deposits they receive are not part of M3, and there will therefore be no impact on euro area broad money. If the sellers are euro area credit institutions or money 
market funds (i.e. they belong to the euro area money-issuing sector), they will receive either reserves or deposits with another MFI, both of which are consolidated within the euro area MFI sector and do not affect euro area M3.
25The indirect effects of the APP on 
M3 result from the portfolio rebalancing that the programme is intended to bring about. Some of the portfolio rebalancing transactions may shift funds outside the money-holding sector or towards 
instruments that are not included in M3, thereby ﬁdestroyingﬂ money. By contrast, 
portfolio rebalancing by entities outside the money-holding sector may shift deposits towards the money-holding sector, thereby ﬁcreatingﬂ money. Some stylised 
examples of such indirect effects on money are provided below.
Money is destroyed when euro area money-holders acquire assets from non-euro area residents. As euro area residents seek to diversify their portfolios and 
pursue higher returns in the context of low yields in the euro area, they may invest 
in assets held outside the euro area. The settlement of these transactions will shift 
deposits which are held by euro area money-holders and included in M3 to deposits held by non-residents, thereby destroying money.
The acquisition by euro area money-holders of non-M3 liabilities of euro area MFIs also destroys money.
 While the deposits received in the settlement of the sale of assets to the Eurosystem will almost certainly be highly liquid and therefore included in M3, sellers may then chose to acquire assets from banks which are 
not included in M3 (such as long-term bank bonds or bank equity) in order to earn higher returns by increasing their exposure to duration or other types of risk. While aggregate bank liabilities may not change, the shift in their composition destroys money. A similar effect materialises if euro area money-holders acquire assets held 
by euro area banks, such as government and corporate bonds, or repay loans to banks.Money is created through the acquisition by euro area MFIs or non-euro area residents of assets from euro area money-holders. Euro area money-holders are not the only economic agents engaged in portfolio rebalancing. Both non-residents 
and euro area MFIs will seek to re-optimise their portfolios. In doing so they may acquire assets from other non-residents or euro area MFIs, in which case there will be no effect on euro area M3. Some of the rebalancing is likely, however, to involve 
the acquisition of assets from euro area money-holders (especially as the money-holding sector will be encouraged to issue new assets given the lower funding 24 This assumes that the proceeds from the sale are credited to a short-term bank deposit account, 
included in M3, which is typically the case.25 Strictly speaking, there is also another possibility, namely that the seller is a central government entity, 

which is part of the money-neutral sector. In this case, sales do not have a direct effect on M3. Given 
that the APP cannot include primary purchases of government debt, this case is unlikely to be of 
quantitative relevance.50costs), for example in the form of corporate bonds or equity.
26 Eventually banks are also expected to use some of the reserves they obtain to extend loans to euro area households and firms. All these transactions give rise to deposits held by euro area 
money-holders, thereby creating money.
4.2 The information content of the increase in M3
The increase in M3 associated with the APP results mainly from an exogenous 
shift in the supply of money and is therefore highly informative for future 
spending and inflation. Movements in broad money are generally informative for 
current and future spending in the economy and contain important signals for future 
developments in inflation. Indeed, in recognition of this, the ECB™s monetary policy 
strategy contains a distinct pillar devoted to the analysis of monetary developments 
in order to identify risks to price stability in the medium to longer term. Movements in 
broad money that can be traced back to a higher demand for monetary assets have 

lesser implications for future inflation, as the higher money holdings in fact reflect 
portfolio decisions and will not therefore trigger portfolio rebalancing or increased 
spending. In the case of the APP, however, most of the associated increase in M3 
reflects an exogenous augmentation of bank deposits engineered by the central bank.As the APP compresses yields, part of the increase in broad money it 
generates will be absorbed by higher demand to hold money for investment reasons, but a substantial part will remain macroeconomically active and 
be informative for future developments in spending and inflation. When assessing the implications of the APP-induced increase in M3 for future inflation 

developments, it should be borne in mind that the APP is primarily intended to 
compress the yields on other assets. This, in turn, reduces the opportunity cost 
of holding money, which increases demand on the part of agents in the economy 
to hold money. In an environment where yields are already low, a further decline 
may cause a disproportionate increase in agents™ willingness to hold money. This 

is because in order to invest in more sophisticated, non-monetary assets savers must incur fixed costs related to the acquisition of information and expertise in managing such investments. The hurdle that these costs pose is too high when 
the extra remuneration which can be earned is low. The upshot is that part of the 
money exogenously injected into the economy by the central bank via the APP will 
be met by increased demand for monetary instruments by the receiving agents, thereby eliminating part of the reinvestment and spending processes that would 
give rise to macroeconomic effects. In other words, in the current yield environment, 
the increase in M3 engineered by the APP is expected to have more muted 
macroeconomic effects than an increase of the same size in a more typical interest 
rate environment. Nevertheless, the overall effect is still clearly sizeable, particularly 
when taking into account that the propensity to spend ﬁwindfallﬂ increases in money 
balances is likely to be higher in the present yield environment. 26 Note that the euro area banking sector as a whole cannot offload reserves through such transactions. 
The efforts of individual banks, however, to pass on their reserves results in an increase in deposits of 
non-banks. For the sector as a whole, therefore, the portfolio re-optimisation occurs through expanding 
the balance sheet and thereby gradually shifting its composition.515 Conclusions
This article has analysed the impact on money and credit of the most recent non-standard measures announced by the ECB. The empirical evidence 
suggests that these policies have successfully improved the credit conditions in the 
euro area and supported the ongoing recovery in lending activity.
The TLT
ROs and APP have significantly lowered yields in a broad set of 
financial market segments. The long-term bank funding provided by the TLTROs 
and the acquisition of longer-term private and public sector securities through the APP have had effects on a range of asset prices which generally increase with 
maturity and riskiness.Reductions in bank bond yields, i.e. less expensive market-based financing for banks, have improved their funding costs, enabling a more forthcoming bank attitude towards lending. In practice, the elimination of illiquidity and abnormally high spreads and mark-ups in malfunctioning credit markets has incentivised banks and other lenders to pass the funding cost relief on to final borrowers in terms of higher credit flows and better lending conditions.Overall, the non-standard measures have helped push the intended monetary policy accommodation through the intermediation chain to reach final borrowers, i.e. household and firms. This contributes to the recovery in lending 
and economic activity, which is expected to produce a sustained adjustment of 
inflation rates towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
52The short-term fiscal implications  of structural reforms The economic and sovereign debt crisis revealed significant gaps in the economic resilience of several euro area countries, pointing to a strong need for structural reforms. Despite the long-term benefits of structural reforms, their implementation prior to the crisis was suboptimal. Typically, the main resistance to the adoption and 
implementation of structural reforms stems from the vested interests of affected groups in society. Besides this, the possible short-term economic and fiscal costs of 
structural reforms are also sometimes mentioned as a reason for postponing their adoption, suggesting a short-term trade-off between fiscal consolidation and reforms. 
The European Commission™s Communication on making the best use of the flexibility 
within the existing rules of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP)1 follows this logic and foresees an allowance for the direct short-term fiscal costs of reforms, enabling 
European Union (EU) Member States implementing structural reforms to delay fiscal adjustment compared with the SGP benchmark requirement. This article reviews the 
evidence of the short-term effects of structural reforms, given the prominence that the latter may gain in the application of the SGP. Their quantification is surrounded 
by uncertainty and is conditional on a large number of assumptions. That said, only a small set of structural reforms appear to have direct short-term fiscal costs, with 
ﬁsystemicﬂ pension reforms being the most prominent example. This suggests that the structural reform clause should be carefully applied. In particular, it is important 
that the assumptions underlying the decision to apply such a clause are spelled out in a clear and transparent way, which will also ensure a consistent application over 
time and across countries. 1 Introduction 
The economic and sovereign debt crisis made it more pressing for structural 

reforms to be carried out in several euro area countries. Large fiscal imbalances, 
weak external competitiveness, a leveraged financial sector, indebted households 
and poor productivity weighed negatively on the euro area™s capacity to adjust to the 
economic downturn caused by the financial crisis. The crisis revealed the deep-rooted 
nature of fiscal imbalances and, in some countries, masked more fundamental public 
sector inefficiencies. The weak resilience of several euro area economies was also to 
some extent due to insufficient reform efforts in the pre-crisis period.
2 1 Communication COM (2015) 12 of 13 January 2015 from the Commission to the European Parliament, 
the Council, the European Central Bank, the Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the 
Regions and the European Investment Bank on making the best use of the flexibility within the existing 
rules of the Stability and Growth Pact.2 See Leiner-Killinger N., Lopéz Peréz, V., Stiegert, R. and Vitale, G., ﬁStructural reforms in EMU and the 

role of monetary policy: a survey of the literatureﬂ, Occasional Paper Series, No 66, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, July 2007. This paper points out that insufficient progress was made in terms of implementing 
structural reforms between the start of Economic and Monetary Union and 2007. 53Both economic and political factors are often cited as holding back the adoption and implementation of structural reforms. Typically, the main resistance 
to the implementation of structural reforms stems from the vested interests of 
affected groups in society.
 The possible transitional (economic and fiscal) costs of structural reforms are also sometimes seen as factors that generate political resistance to reforms. This is compounded by the fact that governments have 
temporal horizons that are usually too short to capitalise politically on the long-run benefits of reforms and might not therefore be willing to tolerate the possible  short-run costs of reforms. The European Commission™s Communication on making the best use of the 
flexibility within the existing rules of the SGP gave more prominence to the 
possible short-term fiscal costs of structural reforms. The SGP™s structural reform 
clause was first introduced in 2005, although in its first ten years it was invoked only 
for ﬁsystemicﬂ pension reforms by some Member States. In order to spur the adoption 
and implementation of structural reforms, the Communication gave more prominence 

to the clause that allows Member States implementing structural reforms to delay fiscal 
adjustment compared with the benchmark prescribed by the SGP, thus compensating 
for the potential short-term economic and fiscal costs of reforms. 
Since only a small set of structural reforms might have short-term fiscal costs, flexibility under the SGP should be used carefully to avoid the risk of it 
being misused. This article reviews the channels through which structural reforms affect the economy and public finances, and discusses the main issues related 

to the assessment of their effects. Structural reforms encompass policy actions 
that increase the efficiency and competitiveness of the economy, with beneficial 

effects for long-term fiscal sustainability. Labour and product market reforms, as 
well as systemic pension reforms that benefit long-term fiscal sustainability, are 
typical examples of structural reforms. Structural reforms in the fiscal domain generally produce both short-term and long-terms gains, whereas short-term fiscal costs are limited to a few examples (see Box 1). This article finds that, with the 
notable exception of systemic pension reforms, no significant short-term fiscal costs are generally associated with structural reforms. When such costs exist, their 
quantification is often uncertain and largely a matter of judgement. This is in line 
with earlier studies which found that, although some reforms may have short-term budgetary costs, these appear to be rather low and the evidence is not always statistically significant.3 This suggests that the structural reform clause of the 
SGP should be carefully applied. In particular, it is important that the assumptions 

underlying the decision to apply such a clause are spelled out in a clear and transparent way, which will also ensure a consistent application over time and 
across countries. In general, however, the focus of the policy debate should be on 
better ways to incentivise the adoption and implementation of structural reforms. Section 2 summarises the structural reform provisions under the SGP, including 
the recent Communication from the European Commission. Section 3 provides 
a qualitative description of the main channels via which such reforms may affect 
public finances in the short term either directly or indirectly via their impact on the 3 See Deroose, S. and Turrini, A., ﬁThe Short-Term Budgetary Implications of Structural Reforms: 
Evidence from a Panel of EU Countriesﬂ CEPR Discussion Paper, No 5217, 2005.54macroeconomic aggregates. Section 4 discusses the difficulties of quantifying 
precisely and reliably such effects for use in the context of the EU fiscal surveillance 
framework. Section 5 concludes. 2 Structural reforms under the Stability and Growth Pact The 2005 reform of the SGP aimed to enhance its growth-oriented nature and 
to better account for country-specific economic circumstances.4 The structural reform clause introduced under the preventive arm of the SGP in
 2005 gives special consideration to the implementation of structural reforms in the application of the framework. In particular, Member States may temporarily deviate from their 
medium-term budgetary objective (MTO) or the adjustment path towards it when 
implementing ﬁmajor structural reforms with direct long-term positive budgetary effects, including by raising potential sustainable growth, and therefore a verifiable 
impact on the long-term sustainability of public financesﬂ (Article 5 of Regulation 
(EC) No 1466/97).5 The aim is to avoid the implementation of structural reforms 
with significant short-term fiscal costs, but sizable long-term benefits for fiscal sustainability being held back by the risk of violating the framework. With the exception of so-called systemic pension reforms (see below), no direct connection is established in the Regulation between the scale of the short-term costs of reforms and the allowed deviation from the MTO. 
Systemic pension reforms have received particular attention in the provisions laid down in the SGP governing structural reforms.
 Systemic pension reforms introduce a multi-pillar system including a fully-funded private pillar. These reforms 
have a direct and immediate negative impact on the general government deficit, as 
part of the social security contributions to the public pension pillar are diverted to a fully-funded private pension fund that is classified outside the general government sector. Over time positive budgetary effects materialise, since part of pensions and 
other social benefits will, following the reform, be paid by the fully-funded pension scheme with a corresponding reduction in pension-related government spending. 
The allowed deviation from the MTO shall only reflect the direct net cost of the 
reform, but should remain temporary, and an appropriate safety margin with respect 
to the 3% of GDP deficit reference value is to be preserved. The
 2005 reform also introduced changes to the corrective arm of the SGP as it provided that due 
consideration shall be given to the implementation of systemic pension reforms  when assessing compliance with the deficit and debt criterion and in subsequent 
steps of the excessive deficit procedure (EDP) (Article 2 of Regulation (EC) 
No 1467/97).6 Specifically, when launching and abrogating EDPs based on the 
deficit criterion, the related assessment of deficit figures shall consider the net costs of systemic pension reforms, which need to be verified by Eurostat. This implies an 
4 See, for example, Morris R., Ongena, H. and Schuknecht, L., ﬁThe reform and implementation of the Stability and Growth Pactﬂ, Occasional Paper Series, No 47, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, June 2006.5 Council Regulation (EC) No 1466/97 of 7 July 1997 on the strengthening of the surveillance of 

budgetary positions and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies.6 Council Regulation (EC) No 1467/97 of 7 July 1997 on speeding up and clarifying the implementation 

of the excessive deficit procedure.55allowance to deviate from the deficit reference value as long as the excess is fully explained by the reform costs and the deficit remains close to the reference value.7The structural reform clause was applied in only a few cases and with 
reference solely to systemic pension reforms. Under the corrective arm, the EDP for Lithuania was abrogated in
 2013 taking into account the net cost of the 2012 systemic pension reform, which explained why in 2012 the general government deficit exceeded by 0.2% of GDP the reference value of
 3% of GDP 
set in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). Likewise, the 
EDP for Poland was abrogated in early
 2015, based on validated data for 2014, one year ahead of the deadline set in the 2013 Council Recommendation8, because the remaining excess in the general government deficit over the reference value set in the TFEU was explained by the net cost of a previous pension reform. Under the 
preventive arm, Latvia benefited from the pension reform clause in 2013 and was granted a three-year allowance to deviate from the MTO. 
In January 2015 the scope of the structural reform clause was broadened by the European Commission™s Communication on making the best use of 
the flexibility within the existing rules of the SGP. 
To further
 promote Member States™ reform efforts within the existing framework, countries under the preventive 
arm are granted a temporary deviation from the MTO or the adjustment path 

towards it of up to 0.5% of GDP Œ irrespective of the actual cost of the reform Œ 
in case of implementation of a wider range of major structural reforms or reform packages, provided that a safety margin with respect to the deficit reference value is preserved. The European Commission™s Communication also confirms that the 
implementation of structural reforms will be considered a relevant factor under the 
EDP. In the absence of a sound methodological framework to estimate the budgetary 
effects of structural reforms, the European Commission assesses eligibility for the 
structural reform clause on the basis of a dedicated reform plan Œ submitted by the Member State in spring in the context of the annual update of the Stability and Convergence Programmes. The programme needs to include detailed and verifiable 
information, as well as a credible timeline for adoption and delivery of the envisaged reform(s). However, contrary to the Code of Conduct of the SGP
9, the Commission™s 
Communication provides that ﬁex-anteﬂ reform plans (as opposed to implemented reforms) can also be taken into account when granting the temporary deviation from the MTO or the adjustment towards it.
10 A number of countries are benefitting from the increased flexibility under the 
SGP. 
In March 2015 the commitment to implement structural reforms was considered 
7 The modalities of taking into account the net cost of systemic pension reforms in the context of the 
EDP were revised in 2011. While the 2005 reform of the SGP envisaged a gradual diminishing of the 
allowance over a five-year time frame, the 2011 reform of the SGP removed this time constraint, but 
introduced the condition of a government debt ratio below 60% of GDP.8 See also the Recommendation for a Council Recommendation with a view to bringing an end to the 

situation of an excessive government deficit in Poland COM(2013) 393 final, which sets the deadline 
for correcting the EDP at 2015. 9 Specifications on the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact and Guidelines on the format 
 and content of Stability and Convergence Programmes, European Commission, available at  http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/economic_governance/sgp/pdf/coc/code_of_conduct_en.pdf10 See the box entitled ﬁFlexibility under the Stability and Growth Pactﬂ, 
Economic Bulletin, Issue 1, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, February 2015.56a relevant factor in granting France a two-year extension of its EDP deadline, rather 
than the one-year extension foreseen as a rule.11 At the same time, in deciding 
whether to open an excessive deficit procedure on account of the debt criterion for 
Italy and Belgium, pursuant to Article
 126(3) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the 
European Union, the European Commission took into account in its reports that 
implementation of structural reforms was one of the relevant factors justifying the 
decision not to open an EDP. In addition, under the preventive arm, Italy was granted 
a generic allowance of 0.4% of GDP to deviate from the MTO adjustment path 
in 2016, on account of the structural reform plan presented by the Italian authorities 

which included a quantitative assessment of the short-term fiscal costs of structural 
reforms amounting to 0.2% of GDP.
12This flexibility must be used carefully in order to preserve fiscal sustainability and the credible application of the SGP provisions. 
The possibility to apply the flexibility provisions also to ex-ante reform plans (as opposed to effectively 

implemented reforms) risks being counterproductive. Ensuring that ex-ante plans are effectively implemented requires continuous monitoring of reform implementation 
(see also Section 4) and timely follow-up in case of lack of progress,13 otherwise countries may have an incentive to delay or even backtrack on their plans once the fiscal flexibility has been granted. The possibility to postpone the adjustment towards 
the MTO, without any compensation for the initial deviation, would further delay 
achievement of the MTO and contribute to making it a ﬁmoving targetﬂ instead of an 
anchor for budgetary planning.14 Finally, and this is the main focus of this article, a 
proper application of the structural reform provisions requires a clear and transparent assessment of the short-term fiscal costs of structural reforms. This is important, 
since its application has recently been broadened to a wide set of reforms. So far, 
no common shared methodology has been developed and a qualitative approach to assessing the impact of structural reforms has been used. 3 The effects of structural reforms Œ a review of the main 
channels Structural reforms have positive long-term effects on output growth, employment and the sustainability of public finances. These beneficial effects 
are well documented in the literature and provide the foundation for the specific 
recommendations regularly addressed by the European Commission and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) to their member countries. For example, reforms that liberalise product markets and improve the 11 The European Commission had already referred to the need to implement structural reforms as early 
as 2013, notably in the context of the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure, when extending the EDP 
deadlines by two years for France, Slovenia and Spain. 12 See the Italian 2015 Stability Programme update (
http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/csr2015/sp2015_

italy_it.pdf)13 The European Commission Communication (op. cit. footnote 1) clarifies that, ﬁIn case a Member State 

fails to implement the agreed reforms, the temporary deviation from the MTO, or from the adjustment 
path towards it, will no longer be considered as warrantedﬂ. 14 See the box entitled ﬁThe effectiveness of the medium-term budgetary objective as an anchor of fiscal 

policiesﬂ, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, June 2015.57business environment stimulate employment and investment, and ultimately benefit total factor productivity, while indirectly benefiting long-term fiscal sustainability. 
Increasing labour market flexibility reduces structural unemployment by inter alia enhancing labour mobility within and across countries.15 Systemic pension reforms which diversify the source of pension income and reduce the burden on public 
finances are beneficial for long-term fiscal sustainability in ageing societies. The short-term fiscal implications of structural reforms have been less extensively explored,16 but have become relevant in the application of the SGP structural reform provisions. 
Structural reforms can affect the economy via 
multiple channels. As concerns public finances, the effects of structural reforms can 
be either direct (for example, higher spending associated with active labour market policies) or indirect via induced changes in the underlying macroeconomic conditions (for example, revenue shortfalls reflecting temporary contractions in nominal wages). This section provides a qualitative review of the main channels through which the structural reforms considered in this article affect public finances and the economy in 

the short run. For each subsection, a table summarises the main reform actions and their short-term budgetary implications, both direct and indirect. The assessment is 
purely qualitative and is based on the assumption that, where there is a change in one instrument, all others are held unchanged. 3.1 Product and labour market reformsDifferent labour market reforms may vary in terms of their short-term direct budgetary effects, although in many cases the net effects are hard to pin down. Labour market reforms are largely motivated by the need to stimulate employment, increase private consumption and growth, thus resulting in higher 
government revenues and lower unemployment related spending. Some measures, such as higher spending on active labour market policies or on reforms that may temporarily lead to higher unemployment, may cause a short-run deterioration in the budget balance. These costs are compensated for by the positive effect of active 

labour market policies on employment and labour productivity, which also benefit 
government revenues in the medium to longer term. Reforms of the wage-setting mechanisms have unclear short-term effects on the budget balance. Reforms that decentralise the wage bargaining system or decrease minimum wages usually have wage moderating effects, which might 

reduce labour tax revenues. At the same time, reductions in minimum wages also 
affect public sector employees, as they imply lower spending for the government as 

an employer, so that the net effect of this type of measure on the budget balance 
is unclear a priori. Similar effects can be expected from loosening employment 
protection legislation. Moreover, softening employment protection might temporarily 
15 For an in-depth analysis of the channels via which labour and product market reforms affect the 
economy, see the article ﬁProgress with structural reforms across the euro area and their possible 
impactsﬂ, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, March 2015.16 See also Caldera Sanchez, A., de Serres, A. and Yashiro, N., ﬁReforming in a Difficult Macro Context: 

What Should be the Priority?ﬂ, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, 2015, forthcoming.58increase unemployment as a result of easier firing conditions during downturns, and therefore lower purchasing power of households. Nonetheless, looser employment protection legislation and more decentralised wage bargaining arrangements may support labour market adjustment and the creation of new vacancies. The reform of unemployment benefits has positive short-term direct effects on public finances, whereas indirect effects depend on the evolution of employment. For example, measures that reduce the generosity of benefits have positive effects, as they reduce unemployment-related government spending. In 
addition, by reducing the workers™ reservation wage, lower unemployment benefits 
may increase the propensity of the unemployed to find new jobs. Similarly, measures 

that reduce the coverage of unemployment benefits lead to a decrease in public spending. If the search and matching process is efficient, job vacancies will be filled 
faster, thus stimulating employment, consumption and government net revenues. In 
this connection, Box 2 assesses the German labour market reforms and their effects. 
Product market reforms increase investment and, in some cases, have positive impacts on the budget balance. Reforms that increase access to finance enable an efficient allocation of resources, while safeguarding financial stability. As 
such, they do not necessarily have direct budgetary implications in the short term, but should increase growth and budget revenues in the longer run. Reforms that enhance firms™ efficiency and productivity (such as reforms improving the business 
environment) and that reduce regulatory barriers to competition usually have no direct budgetary effects. While lowering regulatory barriers to competition stimulates 
the reallocation of resources and might force some less productive firms to close down their businesses, leading to lower employment, it will spur the creation of new 
and more competitive firms. In the medium to long run, all these measures stimulate investment and increase total factor productivity and growth, thereby increasing government revenues. Reforms that reduce red tape are immediately beneficial to private sector activity and may consequently have positive budgetary effects. 
Table 1 
Short-term budgetary effects of labour and product market reforms
Main types of reform actionDirect effect on public financesIndirect effect on public finances via impact on:EmploymentInvestmentConsumptionLABOUR MARKET REFORMDecentralise the collective wage bargaining arrangement and decrease in minimum wages ???Decrease employment protection legislation???

coverage, stronger conditionality) +??Increase spending on active labour market policies -++PRODUCT MARKET REFORM

(including R&D)+Reduce regulatory barriers to competition?+?Decrease the administrative burden (public sector)++
+

work via the impact of reforms on the main macroeconomic aggregates. The ﬁ+ﬂ points to a positive short-term effect on the budget balance that is either direct (second column) or 



the reform is not expected to produce any short-term impact on that variable.593.2 Pension systems and healthcare reforms 
Pension reforms, with the exception of systemic pension reforms introducing a private pillar, may generate short-run budgetary savings and some may 
foster employment. Reforms that reduce the long-term budgetary pressure of the ageing population have been at the top of the reform agenda of several EU countries over the past decade.17 As some reforms entail a reduction in future 
pension payments to workers entering the labour force, pension reforms imply a 
delicate trade-off between fiscal sustainability considerations and pension adequacy, 
especially for low earners. For this reason, most countries tend to protect the lowest earners from benefit cuts.18 Focusing on reforms that increase the long-term financial sustainability and affordability of pension benefits, Table
 2 summarises the key 
reform actions and provides a qualitative assessment of their short-term effects. 
Raising the effective retirement age and removing options for early retirement 
have positive effects on employment and reduce pension spending. This 
type of reform would increase the labour force participation rate at older ages.19 However, if these reforms are phased in over time (i.e. grandfathering clauses), 

as is usually the case, the positive budgetary effects in terms of a lower number of 
pension beneficiaries would materialise only over the medium and long run. Similarly, 
the impact on consumption and investment in the short term would be negligible. 
Measures that reduce the generosity of pension benefits (for example, the suppression 
or reduction of indexation mechanisms and/or changes to the reference wage used 
to calculate pension benefits) produce more immediate positive budgetary effects. 

To counter the effects of the lengthening of life expectancy on pension expenditures, 
linking pension contributions or the retirement age to an index of life expectancy is also 
foreseen. In these cases, negative effects on consumption would materialise only to 
the extent that agents anticipate changes in lifetime income. 
Shifting from a defined benefit to a defined contribution mechanism has been at the core of several reforms over the past few years. In a defined contribution system, future pension benefits are linked to the amount of contributions paid by an individual and to the investment returns on such contributions. This increases 
the long-term sustainability of the pension system, whereas the short-run positive budgetary effects depend on how quickly the reform is phased in. In addition, 
many OECD countries have introduced a second private pension pillar Œ either voluntary or mandatory Œ (these are referred to as systemic pension reforms in the 17 Every three years, the European Commission in cooperation with the Economic Policy Committee™s 
Ageing Working Group publishes the Ageing Report, which contains long-term projections of the budgetary 

impact of population ageing for the 28 EU Member States and Norway. The Ageing Report for the period 

2013-2060 was published in 2015. For an in-depth analysis of the factors determining revisions to pension 

expenditure compared with the 2012 Ageing Report, see the Box entitled ﬁThe 2015 Ageing Report: how 

costly will ageing in Europe be?ﬂ, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, April 2015.18 Pension reforms also pursue other goals (e.g. adequate coverage of workers via both mandatory and 

voluntary schemes and adequate retirement benefits), which are outside the scope of this article. 19 It is often claimed that early retirement options provide job opportunities for the young unemployed. 

However, as discussed in Jousten A., Lefèbvre, M., Perelman, S. and Pestieau, P., ﬁThe Effects of 
Early Retirement on Youth Unemployment: The Case of Belgiumﬂ, Working Paper Series, No 08/30, IMF, February 2008 there is no theoretical foundation to this claim. In the case of Belgium, the authors 
observe a negative link between youth unemployment and early retirement. They show that the activity 
rates of both young and elderly workers are sensitive to business cycles. 60context of the structural reform clause of the SGP) in order to diversify the source of pension benefits and reduce pressure on public finances. This leads to lower public 
revenues not only in the short term, as part of the contributions are diverted to the second pillar, but possibly also over the medium to long term, as in many countries 
retirement savings through private pension plans enjoy a favourable tax treatment (for example, full or partial deductibility of contributions and investment returns, and lower tax rate for retirees).Healthcare reforms can contribute decisively to reducing long-term  age-related costs and generally have positive short-term budgetary effects. The 2010 joint EPC-EC report on healthcare systems20 concluded that policy efforts 
need to be stepped up to ensure that budgetary targets are reached and age-related costs contained.21 Healthcare reforms consist mainly of macro-type controls (for example, caps on current and investment spending, wage controls and agreements 
with pharmaceutical companies to contain spending) and governance reforms (more efficient decision-making processes and cost-effective contracting systems). 
Reforms at the micro-level are also very important and include, among others, the introduction of incentive-compatible, cost-sharing mechanisms, more cost-effective 
procurement practices and use of medicines (especially by encouraging the use of generics), together with an intensification of prevention therapies. All these actions 
can generate substantial budgetary benefits in the short term, when appropriately applied and sequenced.20 European Commission and the Economic Policy Committee (Ageing Working Group), ﬁJoint Report on 
Health Systemsﬂ, European Commission Occasional Papers, No 74, December 2010. 21 Healthcare spending represents a growing share of public expenditure in the EU (about 15% of total 

spending in the EU in 2012, up from about 14% in 2003). For more details on the determinants and 
distribution of healthcare spending, see the 2015 Ageing Report, op. cit. footnote 17. Table 2 
Short-term fiscal impact of pension systems and healthcare reformsMain types of reform actionDirect effect on public financesIndirect effect on public finances via impact on:EmploymentInvestmentConsumptionIncrease work incentives Increase retirement age and/or discourage early retirement ++Equalise retirement age for men and women ++
Index contributions or retirement age to life expectancy +-Increase private contributions to funded pension schemes +-
lower the pension replacement ratio)  +-
Introduce second pillar pension system (systemic pension reform)-
+

Cap healthcare-related spending (e.g. pharmaceuticals, salaries)+Implement governance reforms (decision-making, management, contracting systems)+More effective service provision (cost-effective use of medicines, enhance 


+

work via the impact of reforms on the main macroeconomic aggregates. The ﬁ+ﬂ points to a positive short-term effect on the budget balance that is either direct (second column) or 



the reform is not expected to produce any short-term impact on that variable.61Box 1The treatment of fiscal structural reforms The lack of a precise definition of structural reforms in European Union legislation has led some observers to argue that fiscal structural reforms should also fall under the structural reform clause of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). This box first explains that fiscal structural 
reforms should be distinguished from discretionary policies that have an impact on the fiscal 
balance. It then recalls why fiscal structural reforms can have very positive effects on growth and 
fiscal performance in the long run. For most such reforms, the short-term effects are also positive. 
Overall, it does not therefore appear warranted to include fiscal structural reforms under the reform clause of the SGP.
Fiscal structural reforms need to be distinguished from the discretionary use of fiscal policy as a countercyclical tool or to achieve other short-term government objectives. Fiscal structural reforms aim first and foremost to improve the way the government works and to limit the 
perimeter of government action to those functions for which there is a clear economic rationale. As 

such, they have to be separated from fiscal policy actions dealing with the level of government™s 
taxes and expenditures and rather consist of broad-based policy measures in the areas of both taxation and public financial management. Therefore, tax cuts adopted without compensating 

measures, or spending measures that are not accompanied by broader efforts to rationalise public 
spending, do not qualify as structural reform measures. If properly designed and implemented, most fiscal structural reforms can yield positive gains in both the short and long run. In general, fiscal structural reforms do not have adverse budgetary impacts. They should thus not be subsumed under the structural reform clause of 

the SGP. In a few cases, however, reforms may generate short-term budgetary costs, which are 
expected to be outweighed by medium to long-term budgetary savings. In these cases, and in line with the Regulation and the Code of Conduct, application of the structural reform clause must be limited only to major reforms for which the benefits for long-term fiscal sustainability can be clearly 
quantified.22 The following explains why fiscal structural reforms are important for growth and should 
rather improve the fiscal performance in the long run. A revenue-neutral shift of the tax burden towards less distortionary taxes is a prominent example of structural tax reforms that are aimed at making the tax system more growth-friendly.
23 Direct income taxation is distortionary as it discourages investment by reducing the after-tax returns (in the case of corporate income taxes), as well as reducing labour supply and 
labour demand (hence reducing the long-run level of output) by creating a wedge between the costs firms pay to hire a worker and the net take-home pay (in the case of labour taxes).24 Moreover, 
higher social security contributions paid by employers, achieved by increasing firms™ labour costs, 
22 Article 5.1 of Regulation 1997/1466 states that structural reforms can be accounted for if they ﬁhave 
direct long-term positive impacts, including by raising potential sustainable growth, and therefore a 
verifiable impact on the long-term sustainability of public financesﬂ. 23 These recommendations have featured regularly in the country-specific recommendations addressed 

to EU Member States in the context of the European Semester since 2011. In 2011 eleven countries 
received a country-specific recommendation; in 2015 this number fell to nine.24 Higher labour taxes affect labour supply via both an income effect (higher labour supply, as lower 

disposable income reduces demand for leisure) and a substitution effect (i.e. lower labour supply owing to 

lower return on hours worked) so that the net effect is unclear a priori. Empirical evidence suggests that 

labour supply elasticity is low for male workers, whereas it is positive and higher for female workers.62would reduce labour demand. On the other hand, consumption taxes and property taxes are more neutral vis-á-vis agents™ economic decisions. Consumption taxes are neutral to individuals™ savings 
decisions, as they do not influence the rate of return on savings,25 although they may have negative distributional effects (for example, on low income households, especially if reduced rates for certain 

goods are suppressed) that reduce the political incentives to adopt them. Recurrent property taxes support land development and land use patterns and help to limit housing booms and short-run volatility in prices around an upward trend.26 The assessment value of the tax should be linked to 
the market value of property, although often the former lags behind market values, and moving to a 

fully market-based assessment is politically challenging. The Eurogroup supports Member States™ 
efforts towards reducing taxes on labour in a budget-neutral way. In particular, given the limited 
fiscal space in many countries, reductions in the tax burden on labour should be accompanied by either a compensatory reduction in (non-productive) expenditure, or by shifting labour taxes towards taxes that are less detrimental to growth with a view to respecting fiscal targets in line with the SGP.
27 Reducing the tax burden on labour income and compensating for it via an increase in indirect taxes, notably VAT or property taxes, has been advocated as a tool to regain 
competitiveness domestically in the absence of the possibility of devaluing the nominal exchange rate (i.e. in a currency union). This policy is also known as fiscal devaluation.
28 Reforms of the tax structures can also involve changes in the structure of tax brackets in order to reduce the distortions associated with rate changes and/or make them more progressive. Reforms that improve tax administration effectiveness generate higher revenues and, by fostering tax compliance, support the redistributive function of the tax system. Independence of the revenue administration from political interference (for example, regarding internal organisation and definition of performance standards) and the creation of an oversight board strengthen the transparent enforcement of the tax rules and enhance the accountability of the administration. Simpler procedures for the identification and registration of taxpayers via, for example, the issue of a unique taxpayer identification number, can help the correct filing of 
tax returns, and strengthen tax collection and assessment activities.29 Audit and tax verification 
activities are at the core of the fight against tax evasion and collection of tax arrears and need to be 
supported by the use of new communication technology. 
25 Consumption taxes exclude current savings from the tax base. As such, the present value of a 
consumption tax is the same whether the household consumes now or later. By contrast, an income 
tax (with no deductions for new saving) places a greater burden on savers, because savings enter the 
tax base. See Garner C.A., ﬁConsumption Taxes: Macroeconomic Effects and Policy Issuesﬂ, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2004.26 See Crowe C., Dell™Ariccia, G., Igan, D. and Rabanal, P., ﬁHow to Deal with Real Estate Booms: 

Lessons from Country Experiencesﬂ, Working Paper Series, No 11/91, IMF, April 2011.27 In September 2014 the Eurogroup set out common principles for the design of reforms to reduce the 

tax burden on labour. In addition to the budget-neutrality principle, the other principles are as follows: 
1) the design of reforms should be targeted at the country-specific challenges and aimed at the relevant 

components of the tax burden and at specific groups facing the greatest employment challenges; 
2) the impact of reducing the tax burden on labour can be significantly enhanced when they are part 
of a broader package of labour market reforms; 3) labour tax reforms with offsetting tax or expenditure 
measures can affect income distribution; it is therefore important to ensure broad societal and political 
support. This may be achieved inter alia through sharing impact assessments and consulting all the 
relevant stakeholders, as well as a gradual phasing in of the reforms.28 For an analysis on the use of fiscal devaluation as a tool to regain competitiveness, see the box entitled 

ﬁFiscal devaluation Œ a tool for economic adjustmentﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, December 2011. 29 Some revenue agencies operate registration systems that issue unique taxpayer identification numbers 

or use a citizen or business identification number that is used generally across government agencies. 
See Araki, S. and Claus, I., ﬁA comparative analysis of tax administration in Asia and the Pacificﬂ, Asian 
Development Bank, 2014. 63Improving the quality of fiscal institutions and budgetary frameworks supports the effective implementation of fiscal policies with positive effects on public finances. The adoption of 
medium-term budgetary frameworks, by lengthening the time horizon of fiscal planning, helps to 
overcome short-term biases and supports the formulation and implementation of policies, especially if they span several years. A timely monitoring and control of the use of resources is critical for the 
definition of the main policy objectives. Public financial management reforms are necessary to correct or prevent fiscal imbalances. They encompass all levels of government and include budget formulation, approval and execution, but also public debt management and the management of off-budget entities and implicit liabilities 
(for example, government guarantees and public private partnerships). These reforms are crucial 
to maintain a sustainable fiscal position, guarantee the effective allocation of resources and the 
efficient delivery of public goods and services. Given the degree of institutional change they often 

require, the efficiency-enhancing effects of public financial management reforms may take time to 
materialise. Only a few public financial management reforms may entail short-term budgetary costs. Reforms that rationalise the structure of the public administration may entail short-term costs 
when it comes to the payment of possible redundancy benefits. Reforms that rationalise the use of buildings may lead to the payment of termination fees of rental contracts for unused buildings. However, these costs are short-lived and of limited size when compared with the long-term 
benefits in terms of the improved productivity of the public sector. It should therefore be feasible 
to cater for them in the normal budgetary process, i.e. their treatment does not require a specific 
deviation from the SGP framework.
4 Difficulties in measuring the impact of structural reforms 
Measuring the quantitative impact of implemented structural reforms is 
important, not least given its relevance in the application of the provisions of the SGP. 
As shown in Section 2, the short-term effects of structural reforms 
implemented by governments are taken into account in the application of SGP 
provisions. However, quantifying the impact of implemented structural reforms is subject 
to a high level of uncertainty. 
It is necessary to assess the effectiveness of 
the implementation of a reform or reform package and this depends not only on the adoption of the relevant legislation, but also on the adoption of, sometimes numerous, implementing rules. Moreover, in order to quantify the effect of parametric reforms a 
considerable amount of information is required. For certain reforms, such as pension reforms or specific labour market reforms (for example, changes to unemployment benefits or active labour market policies), it is possible to identify direct and measurable costs and benefits. However, since this requires a large 
64amount of data and other information that is typically available only to governments, it is necessary to rely on official estimates, which are hard to verify. The difficulty of 
externally verifying government estimates creates a significant incentive problem, as estimates can be biased towards presenting a more favourable budgetary outlook. This is especially important if these estimates come to play an important role in the EU fiscal surveillance framework. For non-parametric reforms, quantification often relies to a large extent on judgement, thus increasing the risk of a biased assessment. For product market reforms, which mainly entail changes in laws and regulations, costs and benefits 
are harder to quantify as they cannot be directly observed. Therefore, translating 

individual measures into effects on observable variables can require a significant 
amount of judgement and making a balanced assessment is simply not possible.30 The assessment of implemented structural reforms based on general equilibrium models needs to be taken with caution. Structural reforms may influence the economy simultaneously via several channels with complementary or offsetting effects, including second-round effects. General equilibrium models 
(e.g. dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models) can account for country-specific features and allow the effect of reforms on different macroeconomic 
variables to be simulated under different scenarios. However, the simulation exercise 
is complex, as it requires knowledge about the degree of implementation of reforms and the quantification of their effects when possible, as discussed above. The 

assessment can be further complicated by the difficulty of translating actual reform 
measures into model parameters, either because the necessary information is not available or because existing policies are subsumed under model parameters that do not fully capture the variety and complexity of such policies. As a result, 
the assessment of implemented reforms is either partial or relies on a significant 
degree of judgement as regards, for example, the speed and status of reform implementation and the credibility of the announcement. It is not surprising, therefore, that most existing studies look at the impact of 
hypothetical structural reforms. Cacciatore et al. (2012)31 use a DSGE model to 
simulate the effects of labour and product market reforms when the policy parameters 

are lowered to the level of a benchmark group of countries. They find that in the 
long run GDP and consumption increase, and unemployment falls. These effects 
materialise after two years, and some reforms (for example, job protection reforms) 
initially entail an increase in unemployment. For a wider range of reform areas 
(including market competition and regulation, tax structure and unemployment benefit 
ﬁgenerosityﬂ) Varga and in™t Veld (2014)
32 look at the medium to long-term effects of 
30 The Code of Conduct of the SGP requires EU countries to explicitly report in their Stability and 
Convergence Programmes the effects of recently implemented structural reforms if these are included 
in the projections together with the underlying assumptions and/or model, including variables and 
parameters. However, this is not done on a systematic basis by all countries and typically only  long-term effects are reported. 31 Cacciatore, M., Duval, R. and Fiori, G., ﬁShort-Term Gain or Pain? A DSGE Model-Based Analysis 

of the Short-Term Effects of Structural Reforms in Labour and Product Marketsﬂ, OECD Economics 
Department Working Papers, No 948, 2012, OECD Publishing. 32 Varga, J. and in™t Veld, I. ﬁThe potential growth impact of structural reforms in the EU: A benchmarking 
exerciseﬂ, Economic Papers, No 541, December 2014. 65closing by one-half the gap vis-à-vis the three best-performing EU countries. They 
show that EU GDP increases by
 3% after five years and by 6% after ten years. Gomes 
et al. (2011)
33 use a large-scale DSGE model to assess the impact of an arbitrary 
reduction in the price and wage mark-ups (by 5, 10 and 15 percentage points) in 

Germany and Portugal, and find positive long-run effects on GDP and some short-run 
negative effects in relation to the postponement of consumption in expectation of future 
lower prices. However, it does not necessarily follow that the benefits of reforms in 
one country would also materialise in other countries. Similar reforms can have very 
different effects depending on their interaction with other institutional features of the 
economy and the national context more generally. Box
 2 illustrates the use of DSGE 

models for reform evaluation, taking the Hartz reforms in Germany as an example.Empirical studies also have limitations in capturing the short-term impact of implemented reform measures. Isolating the impact of reforms on quantitative indicators may be difficult, because indicators can change for factors other than 

discretionary government action (for example, spending on active labour market policies) or because such reforms materialise over time. For a wide range of reform areas and indicators (such as labour market reforms, product market regulation and 
taxation) Bouis et al. (2012)34 identify major reform shocks when the change in the policy indicator in a given year exceeds 2 standard deviations. They find that, in line 
with evidence from DSGE models, the gains from reforms take time to materialise. However, no type of reform is found on average to involve significant economic 
losses in the short run, and some of them are found to deliver some benefits in the short run (for example, reductions in unemployment benefits™ replacement rates or 
reductions in benefits duration). The short-term effects of structural reforms can be shaped by their interaction with macroeconomic conditions and other policy areas. Bouis et al. (2012) find that the short-term positive effects of some reforms are stronger during good 
economic times and weaker during bad times. For example, reforms reducing the unemployment benefit replacement ratio generate employment losses if implemented when the labour market is already depressed and labour demand is weak. Likewise, the effects of product market reforms are smoother if the labour 
market is already flexible and the matching efficiency is higher, allowing laid-off 

workers to find a new job more easily (Cacciatori et al., 2012). Box 2Measurement of the costs and benefits of the German labour market reforms of the early 2000s Between 2003 and 2005 Germany adopted fundamental labour market reforms commonly known as the Hartz reforms. These reforms were introduced in response to the comparatively 
high (long-term) unemployment and low GDP growth which had persisted over several years and 
were attributed to a fairly inflexible and rigid labour market structure (see Charts A and B).33 Gomes S., Jacquinot, P., Mohr, M. and Pisani, M. ﬁStructural reforms and macroeconomic performance in 
the euro area countries: a model-based assessmentﬂ, Working Paper Series, ECB, No 1323, May 2011.34 Bouis, R. et al., ﬁThe Short-Term Effects of Structural Reforms: An Empirical Analysisﬂ, 
OECD 
Economics Department Working Papers, No 949, 2012, OECD Publishing.66The Hartz reforms aimed to improve labour market performance. The main objective was 
to improve the labour market matching efficiency 

(Hartz I), promote self-employment and introduce 
more flexible arrangements for low-paid, part-time work (Hartz II); restructure the Federal Labour Agency to further promote the matching 
process between firms and workers (Hartz III) 
and increase incentives to work by decreasing unemployment benefits (Hartz IV). The Hartz 
IV reform entailed a fundamental overhaul of the unemployment benefit system and significantly reduced the level of unemployment 
benefits for the long-term unemployed. As of 
January 2005 the means-tested unemployment and social assistance benefits were merged into unemployment benefits II, whereas as of 2006, the duration of the unemployment benefits (renamed as unemployment benefits I) was shortened from 36 to 12 months (18 months for 
workers aged 55 and over). 35 The Hartz reforms entailed limited short-term 
economic costs. Following the Hartz IV reform, the unemployment rate initially spiked. This 
was largely a statistical artefact of the change 
in the official measurement of unemployment 
following the reform. Then, unemployment 
started to decline in the course of 2005 on the back, inter alia, of a pick-up in economic growth (see Charts A and B). As a consequence, 
government spending on unemployment benefits increased initially, but started to decline thereafter. 

Between 2005 and 2014 labour market-related unemployment spending declined from 4% of GDP 

to 2.5% of GDP.
36 The positive impact of the Hartz reforms on long-term unemployment and growth is 

undisputed in the literature. Among the studies assessing the long-run implications of the Hartz 
reforms there is a consensus that such reforms contributed to a significant reduction in long-run 
35 Before the reform, the unemployment benefit was 60-67% of the last net wage earnings (depending 
on the number of dependent children) for a maximum of three years (based on age and years of 

contributions paid). Afterwards, a means-tested unemployment assistance equal to 53-57% of the 

former net wage was paid for an unlimited amount of time. Means-tested social assistance, amounting to 

about 45% of the average net wage covered the social welfare net and was granted to people for whom 

no other welfare benefits were available (for example, people unable to work). In 2008 the maximum 

duration of unemployment benefit I was extended to 24 months for workers aged 58 and above.36 See Deutsche Bundesbank, ﬁThe Evolution of Labour Market-Related Expenditure in Germanyﬂ, 

Monthly Report, 2015, April, pp. 13-33.Chart AUnemployment rate(percentage of the labour force, monthly seasonally adjusted)14101286
4
201970197519801985199019952000200520152010Sources: Deutsche Bundesbank/Haver Analytics. 
Note: The vertical line marks the year in which the Hartz IV reform was 

adopted.Chart BReal GDP growth rate
(annual percentages)-6-4
-20
2
4
6
810121419711975197919831987199119951999200320072011Source: AMECO.67unemployment (mainly via wage moderation) and to boosting Germany™s GDP growth rate.
37 Some studies find that during the Great Recession those reforms helped, along with short-time 
working policies, to mitigate the employment losses, as witnessed by the fact that, although 
Germany experienced a deeper contraction in GDP than the United States, the employment 
losses were more limited.38 Finally, others attribute to these reforms Germany™s increased 
international competitiveness.39 Model-based simulations of the Hartz reforms allow for an understanding of the main 
transmission channels of their effects. The Hartz reforms are simulated using FiMod,40 a New Keynesian dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model. The model contains a 
complex labour market structure that draws a distinction between unemployed workers receiving 
unemployment benefits and those receiving unemployment assistance (unemployment benefits I and 
II respectively). Labour market participation decisions of households are determined endogenously 
and wages are determined on the basis of a bargaining process between workers and firms. 
The model also features a sophisticated public sector with multiple types of public revenue and 
expenditure and feedbacks to the private sector. The simulations of the effects of the labour market 

reforms considered in this box assume an increase in the efficiency of the job search process 
(matching efficiency) and a reduction in both the level and the duration of unemployment benefits. 
The model simulations presented in this box are subject to some caveats. The model does 
not capture the increase in the unemployment rate that was recorded after the Hartz IV reform, as it cannot account for the change in the official unemployment classification method following the 
reform. Firing decisions in the model are exogenous. As such, the positive employment effects of 
lower wages materialise immediately and do not account for the possibility that, in response to a lower equilibrium wage, firms react initially by laying off the relatively more expensive labour force 
and later hire new (cheaper) workers. Improving the matching efficiency of the labour market fostered employment. Following the restructuring of the Federal Labour Agency, unemployed workers were obliged to register with the 
Agency and were assigned a ﬁpersonalﬂ tutor to help them in the job search process. This led to 
an increase in the matching efficiency which, following Krebs and Scheffel (2013), is assumed to 

have increased by 10% in the model simulations. The increase in employment led to higher gross 
wages and salaries, thus augmenting private consumption and investment demand. The lower 
search costs also enabled firms to reduce prices through the marginal cost channel, which fostered international competitiveness and increased exports (see Chart C).37 See Krebs, T. and Scheffel, M., ﬁMacroeconomic Evaluation of Labor Market Reforms in Germanyﬂ, 
IMF Economic Review, Vol. 61(4), 2013, pp. 664-701; Krause, M. and Uhlig, H., ﬁTransitions in German Labor Market: Structure and Crisisﬂ, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 59, 2012, pp. 64-79.38 Burda, M. and Hunt, J., ﬁWhat Explains the German Labor Market Miracle in the Great Recession?ﬂ, 

Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 2011, pp. 273-319 and Dustman, C., Fitzenberger, B., Schönberg, U. and Spitz-Oener, A., ﬁFrom Sick Man of Europe to Economic Superstar: Germany™s 
Resurgent Economyﬂ, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 28, 2014, pp. 167-188.39 Kollman, R., Ratto, M., Roeger, W., in™t Veld, J. and Vogel, L., ﬁWhat Drives the German Current 

Account? And How Does It Affect Other EU Member States?ﬂ, Economic Policy, Vol. 30, 2015, pp. 47-93. 
40 FiMod is a two-region model of a monetary union. For the simulation at hand, it is calibrated to 

Germany and the rest of the European Monetary Union. For a full description of the base model, 
see Stähler, N. and Thomas, C., ﬁFiMod Œ A DSGE Model for Fiscal Policy Simulationsﬂ, Economic Modelling, Vol. 29, 2012, pp. 239-261.68Chart CImpact of Hartz reforms on selected macroeconomic aggregates in Germany(deviations in percentage points from the pre-reform long-run equilibrium level; quarters)a) Real GDPb) Unemployment rate0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41591317212529333741454953576165-1.0-0.6-0.8-0.4-0.20.01591317212529333741454953576165c) Primary deficit-to-GDP ratio-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.01591317212529333741454953576165The merging of unemployment and social assistance further decreased firms™ unit labour 
costs by reducing the workers™ reservation wage.
 The decline in unemployment assistance 
following the merger of the unemployment and social assistance led to a decrease in the workers™ 
reservation wage and induced workers to accept lower wages. This allowed firms to further 
decrease prices and employ more workers. The reduction in the duration of unemployment benefits 
I had similar effects.
Overall, the Hartz reforms did not entail large short-term economic and fiscal costs. The model simulations contained in this box show that labour market reforms that reduce reservation wages and make the labour market more flexible would have positive effects on employment. 
This is supported by other studies (Cacciatore et al., 2012)41 which find that labour market reforms aimed at reducing the workers™ (reservation) wage tend to generate relatively little costs in terms of 
aggregate macroeconomic outcome. 41 Op. cit. footnote 31. 695 Conclusions 
The short-term fiscal effects of structural reforms have recently gained prominence in the implementation of the SGP.
 The structural reform clause 
introduced by the 2005 reform of the SGP allowed for a delay in fiscal adjustment if 
a Member State implemented a major structural reform with direct long-term positive budgetary effects, including by raising potential sustainable growth. However, 
the clause did little to spur reform momentum. The recent Communication of the 
European Commission on making best use of existing flexibility within the existing rules of the SGP attempts to revive the structural reforms clause, partly by relaxing 

the requirements for its application. However, the structural reform clause of the S
GP should be carefully applied.
 Structural reforms can affect the economy, and public finances in particular, via 
multiple channels. As shown in this article, the reforms with direct short-term costs 
are systemic pension reforms. In other cases, the net effect is difficult to pin down 
(for example, labour and product market reforms), as it also depends on how reforms are bundled in practice. Moreover, there are many examples where the short-term 

effects of structural reforms are actually positive. Therefore, it is important that the 
assumptions underlying the decision to apply such a clause are spelled out in a clear and transparent way.
While a quantification of the costs of reforms is necessary for their incorporation in the SGP, this generally has to rely on judgemental 
assumptions. Model simulations of the effects of reforms are typically surrounded 
by a large degree of uncertainty. The lack of a shared methodology at the EU level to 
assess the effects of structural reforms speaks in favour of a cautious application of 
the SGP provisions on structural reforms. 
Alternative ways to support the adoption and implementation of structural reforms in the euro area should be sought. The Five Presidents™ Report
42 published in June 2015 is a useful reference point in this respect. The Report 
identifies steps towards a genuine Economic Union and emphasises, among  other things, the need to achieve sustainable convergence in the euro area,  which requires a renewed impetus to foster structural reforms in Member States. The report encourages further steps towards better coordination and surveillance of policies that are relevant for competitiveness. It recommends the creation by each euro area member country of an independent national body Œ or ﬁcompetitiveness 
authorityﬂ Œ which would be in charge of tracking performance and policies that influence a country™s competitiveness. The report foresees scope for strengthening 
the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure not only as a tool to detect imbalances, 42 See ﬁCompleting Europe™s Economic and Monetary Unionﬂ, available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/priorities/economic-monetary-union/docs/5-presidents-report_en.pdf70but also to encourage structural reform implementation via the European Semester.
43 The importance of an institution-based approach for the governance of structural reforms in the euro area has also been reiterated by the ECB™s President in his call 
for ﬁa move from rules towards institutionsﬂ.44 A European institution could help in 
two respects: first, by making it easier to agree on the aims of structural reforms by aligning to best practice; and, second, by making it easier to implement them, using European law to bypass vested interests.43 See also Banerji, A., Barkbu, B., John J., Kinda, T., Saksonovs, S., Schoelermann, H. and Wu, T., 
ﬁBuilding a Better Union: Incentivising Structural Reforms in the Euro Areaﬂ, Working Paper Series,  No 15/201, IMF, September 2015.44 See the speech by the President of the ECB at the SZ Finance Day, Frankfurt am Main, 16 March 2015, 

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp150316.en.html71European statistics: cooperation between the European System  of Central Banks and the European 
Statistical SystemThe European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the partnership of the European 
Statistical System (ESS) cooperate closely on European statistics, in particular 
economic and financial statistics. While the ESCB and the ESS partnership operate 
under separate legal frameworks that reflect their respective governance structures, 
they follow the same statistical principles and apply thorough statistical quality 
assurance procedures in support of policy analysis and European decision-making, 
and in order to provide a reliable and timely source of information for the wider public. 
Together, the ESCB and the ESS partnership are taking a leading role in global 

statistical projects, such as the Special Data Dissemination Standard Plus (SDDS Plus) of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the G20™s Data Gaps Initiative. 
1 IntroductionEuropean economic and financial statistics are at the forefront of worldwide 
statistical developments. The success of European statistics is largely due to the 
robust legal framework underpinning the collaboration between the national and European statistical systems. European statistics are produced by two separate pillars that work in close cooperation. One pillar is the ESCB, a system composed of the ECB and the national central banks (NCBs) of the EU Member States. The other 
pillar is the ESS, a partnership comprising the European Commission (Eurostat), national statistical institutes (NSIs) and other national authorities that produce 
statistics at the national level. Close cooperation and sharing ideas and approaches between the statistical function of the ESCB and the ESS laid the foundations for the continuous broadening of the available European economic and financial statistics. This article is structured as follows: Section 2 outlines the legal framework of the two 
pillars of European statistics. Section 3 explains the institutional separation between the ESCB and the ESS. Section 4 describes the close cooperation between both 
pillars. Section 5 presents some conclusions. 722 The ESCB and the ESS: the two pillars of European statisticsThe production of European statistics is organised around two separate pillars, the ESCB and the ESS partnership, with separate legal frameworks and governance structures. The ESCB is a fully fledged system enshrined in the Treaty 
on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).1 It is composed of the ECB and the NCBs; the ECB™s Governing Council is its highest decision-making body. 
According to its statute2, the ECB, assisted by the NCBs, may collect the statistics 
necessary to undertake the ESCB™s tasks, including for monetary policy and 
financial stability purposes, either from the competent national authorities or 
directly from economic agents. The data collected may also be used for banking 
supervision purposes. The Council of the European Union has defined the natural and 
legal persons subject to reporting requirements by the ECB, the statistical principles to 
be followed, the confidentiality regime and the appropriate provisions for enforcement.3 The actual statistics that are collected, compiled and disseminated by the ESCB are 

determined by the ECB™s Governing Council. They are reflected in the ESCB™s statistical 
work programme, which is approved by the ECB™s Governing Council and supported 
by comments from its General Council. These are largely financial but also economic 
statistics, such as money and banking (including interest rates) statistics, banknotes 
statistics, payments and payment systems statistics, financial stability statistics, balance 
of payments statistics and international investment positions statistics.4 The ECB collects the statistical data, assisted by the NCBs and with the 
support of the ESCB™s Statistics Committee.
5 It then produces the statistics, conducts quality assurance and disseminates them in conformity with the statistical principles of impartiality, objectivity, professional independence, cost-effectiveness, 
statistical confidentiality, minimisation of the reporting burden and high output 
reliability.
6 These statistical principles are reflected in the ESCB™s public commitment 
on European statistics.7Apart from the European statistics produced by the ESCB, many other 
European statistics are necessary to support the various policies of the 
European Union. These include economic statistics, such as the Harmonised Index 
1 See Article 282(1) TFEU.
2 See Article 5 of Protocol (No 4) of the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB.3 Council Regulation (EC) No 2533/98 of 23 November 1998 concerning the collection of statistical 
information by the European Central Bank (OJ L 318, 27.11.1998, p. 8), amended by Council 
Regulation (EC) No 951/2009 of 9 October 2009 (OJ L 269, 14.10.2009, p. 1) and Council Regulation 
(EU) No 2015/373 of 5 March 2015 amending Regulation (EC) No 2533/98 concerning the collection of 
statistical information by the European Central Bank (OJ L 64, 7.3.2015, p. 6).4 See, for example, Article 2(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2533/98.5 Article 9(1) of the Decision of the ECB of 19 February 2004 adopting the Rules of Procedure of the 

ECB (ECB/2004/2) (OJ L 80, 18.3.2004, p. 33).6 The statistical principles of the ESCB are referred to in Article 3a of Council Regulation (EC) 

No 2533/98.7 See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/html/pcstats.en.html73of Consumer Prices (HICP) or gross domestic product (GDP) and its components, as 
well as statistics in the areas of population and social conditions, regions, industry, 
trade and services, transport, agriculture and fishing, and the environment and energy. 
They are produced by the ESS Œ a partnership established by secondary legislation.8According to the Treaty provisions
9, the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure, may adopt statistical legal acts addressed to Member States, 
defining statistics to be produced by the ESS partnership. The ESS also 
conducts quality assurance for its statistics in line with the Treaty provisions
10, i.e. professional independence, impartiality, objectivity, reliability, cost-effectiveness and 
statistical confidentiality. These principles are set out in further operational detail in 
the ESS Code of Practice.113 Institutional separation between the ESCB and the ESS
The independence of the ESCB when producing its statistics is guaranteed in 
its statute as well as in the Treaty provisions.
12 This was recently recalled by the 
European Parliament and the Council of the European Union.13 It is the sole responsibility of the Governing Council of the ECB, as the ESCB™s 

decision-making body, to coordinate the statistical activities of the ECB 

and the NCBs in their capacity as members of the ESCB. In other words, the ECB and the NCBs are not part of the ESS partnership when collecting statistical information and producing European statistics for the ECB. Moreover, although the 
members of the ESCB do not participate in the production of European statistics by the ESS, data produced by NCBs may be used, directly or indirectly, by NSIs, other 
national authorities and the European Commission (Eurostat) for the production of European statistics by the ESS. Similarly, NSIs may contribute to ESCB statistics 

while they are not part of the ESCB.14 The ECB welcomes the recent Regulation of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of the European Union reinforcing the role of Eurostat and the 8 Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 on European statistics and repealing Regulation (EC, Euratom) 
No 1101/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the transmission of data subject to 
statistical confidentiality to the Statistical Office of the European Communities, Council Regulation 
(EC) No 322/97 on Community Statistics, and Council Decision 89/382/EEC, Euratom establishing a 
Committee on the Statistical Programmes of the European Communities (OJ, L 87, 31.3.2009, p. 164), 
amended by Regulation (EU) No 2015/759 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 
2015 amending Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 on European statistics (OJ, L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 90).9 See Article 338(1) TFEU.
10 See Article 338(2) TFEU.
11 See http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3859598/5921861/KS-32-11-955-EN.PDF
12 See Articles 130 and 338 TFEU.13 See Recital 24 of Regulation (EU) No 2015/759.
14 See Recital 9 of Regulation (EC) 223/2009.
74NSIs in coordinating the activities of other national authorities that produce statistics.15 This will contribute to strengthening the reliability of European statistics 
produced by the ESS. 4 Close cooperation between the ESCB and the ESS 
The members of the ESCB and the ESS partnership need to cooperate 
closely to maximise synergies, minimise the reporting burden and ensure the production of complete and coherent European statistics.16 To facilitate this 
cooperation, the quality frameworks of the ESCB and the ESS have been closely 
aligned. The ESCB public commitment on European statistics and the ESS Code of 
Practice set out almost identical statistical principles for the development, production and dissemination of European statistics. This alignment of the quality frameworks aims to ensure that the same quality 
standards apply to both sets of European statistics. The quality of statistics 
produced by the ESS, such as HICP or GDP and its components, can be fully trusted 
by the ESCB. Equally, the European Parliament and the Council of the European 
Union can have full confidence in the reliability of the European statistics produced by 

the ESCB, such as monetary and financial statistics or balance of payments statistics.The ESCB also cooperates closely with the ESS when setting up new statistical 
requirements or enhancing existing statistics. Indeed, within the framework of the 
cost-benefit analyses17 carried out by the ESCB regarding developing new statistics, 
the ECB consults the European Commission on its user priorities. Furthermore, the 
ECB consults the Commission on draft ECB regulations in order to avoid conflicting 
requests for data from the ECB and the Commission.18 In the same manner, the 
ECB shall be consulted on any proposed Union act Œ including delegated and 
implementing acts Œ that falls within its fields of competence.19The two statistical systems also cooperate closely through the Committee on Monetary, Financial and Balance of Payments Statistics (C
MFB)20, as well as through the European Statistical Forum (ESF) (see Chart). The CMFB, 
composed of senior representatives of NCBs, NSIs, the ECB and the European 
Commission (Eurostat), was set up by the Council of the European Union in 1991 and provides a platform to support the operational cooperation between the two statistical pillars, particularly in statistical areas in which they have shared responsibilities, such as the production of national accounts and balance of payments statistics. 15 See Articles 1(1) and 1(3) of Regulation (EU) No 2015/759.
16 Article 9 of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 and Article 2(a) of Regulation (EC) No 2533/98.
17 See ﬁ2.3 The merits and costs procedureﬂ, Quality assurance procedures within the ECB 
statistical function, ECB, April 2008, pp. 7-8, available at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecbstatisticsqualityassuranceprocedure200804en.pdf?d80c2b00b4b02f1672f239eb4a783af118 Article 5(2) of Regulation (EC) No 2533/98.
19 Articles 127(4) and 282(5) TFEU.20 The CMFB was established by Council Decision in 1991. The original Council Decision 91/115/EEC 

was replaced on 13 November 2006 by Council Decision 2006/856/EC (OJ, L 332, 30.11.2006, p. 21).75The CMFB provides opinions to the European Commission (Eurostat) and the ECB on statistical matters in its field of competence.21 These CMFB opinions 
help to ensure that the statistics produced by the ESCB and the ESS are credible, consistent and comparable across Member States. This applies in particular to 
advice that spans different European statistics produced by the ESCB and the ESS. 
For example, the statistical classification of units in financial accounts produced by the ESCB and the non-financial accounts produced by the ESS must be identical, in order to facilitate their integration into a complete set of sector accounts on a quarterly basis. These sector accounts are the basis for coordinated ECB and 

Eurostat press releases Œ a unique example of close cooperation between the statistical function of central banks and statistical offices that is rarely encountered in 
other parts of the world. In addition, the CMFB also provides advice to the European Commission (Eurostat) in the context of the excessive deficit procedure for cases that are either complex or of general interest in the view of the Commission or the Member State concerned.22 In such cases, the European Commission (Eurostat) takes a decision only after consulting with the CMFB, and publishes its decision together with the opinion of the CMFB. To enhance cooperation between the two pillars at the strategic level, the 
ESF was established in 2013 through a memorandum of understanding (MoU) between the ESS and the ESCB.23 The ESF advises the two pillars on the content 
and consistency of the statistical work programmes, makes proposals to improve the programmes™ coordination, and identifies future challenges for European statistics 
21 The CMFB exercises its advisory role to the European Commission (Eurostat) and the ECB pursuant to 
Article 4 of Council Decision 2006/856/EC: ﬁThe Committee may express opinions on its own initiative 
on any questions relating to those statistics that are of common concern to the Commission and 
national statistical authorities, on the one hand, and the ECB and NCBs, on the other. In the execution 
of its tasks, the Committee shall give its views to all interested parties.ﬂ22 The CMFB exercises its advisory role on EDP matters to the European Commission (Eurostat) 
pursuant to Article 10(2) of Regulation 479/2009 of the Council of the European Union. 23 See Memorandum of Understanding on the cooperation between the Members of the European 

Statistical System and the Members of the European System of Central Banks of 24 April 2013.ChartTwo pillars for European economic and financial statistics
Memorandums ofUnderstanding: ESS/ESCB  &  ECB™s DG-Statistics/Eurostat Article 338  TFEU  Article 5 ESCB/ECB Statute  European statistics legal actsadopted by the ECB Governing Council  European Statistical Systempartnership  European System of Central Banksstatistics function  European statistics legal acts adoptedby European Parliament and Council   Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) CMFBESF76and areas of priority for cooperation between the ESS and the ESCB. To set out 
this close cooperation between the two European statistical pillars, Eurostat and the ECB™s Directorate General Statistics signed an MoU in
 200324 following an earlier MoU between the European Monetary Institute and Eurostat. The aim was to avoid 

duplication of statistical work, prevent conflicting requests for data from the ECB and the European Commission (Eurostat), and promote high-quality and consistent statistics for use by policy-makers and the general public. This close cooperation is also fundamental to keeping European statistics at the forefront of worldwide statistical developments. The ESCB and the ESS 
have played an influential role in updating key international statistical standards25 and ensuring their implementation in all European statistics. This resulted last year in 

a significant expansion in the content and detail of European economic and financial statistics, and will contribute to a gradual increase in their quality over the coming years. Likewise, the ECB and the European Commission (Eurostat) have actively contributed to the work of the Inter-Agency Group on Economic and Financial Statistics, which has been leading the response of the statistical community to the request of G20 finance ministers and central bank governors to close the 
information gaps that were revealed during the crisis (the Data Gaps Initiative).26 In parallel, the IMF developed the SDDS Plus, a new initiative adding more demanding requirements to the existing SDDS.27 5 Conclusions
The strong governance of the ESCB as a system under the TFEU has been fundamental to its important contributions to European statistics. Its key features are: (i) full independence when producing European statistics, (ii) the 
capacity to legislate within the framework set by the Council of the European Union, and (iii) the central role of the ECB™s Governing Council in deciding the ESCB 
statistical programme. The ESS is a partnership established by secondary legislation. The statistics 
produced by the ESS are based on statistical legal acts adopted by the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. The reinforced role of Eurostat 
and the NSIs in coordinating the statistical activities of other national authorities, 
excluding NCBs, will contribute to strengthening the reliability of European statistics produced by the ESS. While the ESCB and the ESS produce and publish their 24 See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/en_mou_with_eurostat1.pdf
25 For example, the ﬁSystem of National Accountsﬂ (2008 SNA) adopted by the United Nations Statistical 
Commission and the International Monetary Fund™s ﬁBalance of Payments and International Investment 
Position Manualﬂ (BPM6).26 The second phase of the G20™s Data Gaps Initiative, as outlined in the ﬁSixth Progress Report on 

the Implementation of the G20 Data Gaps Initiativeﬂ, prepared by the staff of the IMF and the FSB 

Secretariat and supported by the Inter-Agency Group on Economic and Financial Statistics (IAG), was 

adopted by the G20 finance ministers and central bank governors on 4-5 September 2015, as reflected 

in the communiqué Œ https://g20.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/September-FMCBG-Communique.pdf 
27 The SDDS was established by the IMF to guide members that have, or might seek, access to 

international capital markets in the provision of their economic and financial data to the public.77respective statistics, and perform quality assurance for them, they cooperate closely through the CMFB and the ESF to prevent conflicting statistical requests, minimise the reporting burden and ensure consistency across the different statistical domains.
This close cooperation between the ESCB and the ESS is at the heart of the leading role that European statistics play in international statistical initiatives, such as the G20™s Data 
Gaps Initiative and the IMF™s SDDS Plus initiative, and 
secures the comparability of key economic and financial indicators for the European Union with those of other major economies.S 1StatisticsS 1ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - StatisticsContents 1 External environment
S 2 2 Financial developments
S 3 3 Economic activity
S 8 4 Prices and costs
S 14 5 Money and credit
S 18 6 Fiscal developments
S 23Further information ECB statistics can be accessed from the Statistical Data Warehouse (SDW): 
http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/ Data from the statistics section of the Economic Bulletin are available from the SDW: http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node
=1000004813 A comprehensive Statistics Bulletin can be found in the SDW: 
http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node=1000004045  Methodological definitions can be found in the General Notes to the Statistics Bulletin:http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?no
de=10000023 Details on calculations can be found in the Technical Notes to the Statistics Bulletin:http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?nod
e=10000022
html/glossa.en.htmlConventions used in the tables   
  -data do not exist/data are not applicable 

   
 .data are not yet available
   
 ...nil or negligible

   

 (p)provisional
   
 s.a.seasonally adjusted

   

 n.s.a.non-seasonally adjusted
S 21 External environmentS 2ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics1.1 Main trading partners, GDP and CPI         GDP 1)    CPI   (period-on-period percentage changes)   (annual percentage changes)G20UnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:   OECD countriesUnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:
StatesKingdom
euro areaStatesKingdom
euro area 2)Totalexcluding food
(HICP)(HICP)and energy12345
67
89101112
1320123.02.21.21.77.8-0.82.3
1.82.12.80.02.6
2.520133.11.52.21.67.7-0.31.6
1.61.52.60.42.6
1.420143.32.42.9-0.17.4
0.91.7
1.81.61.52.72.0
0.42014 Q4 0.80.50.80.31.7
0.41.4
1.81.20.92.51.5
0.22015 Q1 0.70.20.41.11.3
0.50.6
1.7-0.10.12.31.2
-0.3         Q2 0.71.00.7-0.31.8
0.40.5
1.60.00.00.51.4
0.2         Q3 . . . . 1.8
. . 
. 0.10.0. 1.7
0.12015 Apr. - - - - - - 0.4
1.6-0.2-0.10.61.5
0.0         May - - - - - - 0.6
1.60.00.10.51.2
0.3         June - - - - - - 0.6
1.60.10.00.41.4
0.2         July - - - - - - 0.6
1.70.20.10.31.6
0.2         Aug. - - - - - - 0.6
1.70.20.00.22.0
0.1         Sep. - - - - - - . 
. 0.0-0.1. 1.6
-0.1Sources: Eurostat (col. 3, 6, 10, 13); BIS (col. 2, 4, 9, 11, 12); OECD (col. 1, 5, 7, 8).1) Quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted.
2) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.               imports 1) 2)    Global 2)UnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:ManufacturingServicesNew exportGlobalAdvancedEmerging
StatesKingdom
euro areaorderseconomiesmarket
economies12345
678
910
1112
201252.654.452.049.950.947.2
50.251.948.53.72.54.4
201353.354.856.852.651.549.7
52.352.750.73.2-0.25.2
201454.257.357.950.951.152.7
53.454.151.53.53.53.5
2014 Q4 53.355.656.350.951.451.5
52.453.650.41.51.81.4
2015 Q1 53.956.957.350.451.553.3
52.854.350.3-2.61.7-5.0
         Q2 53.455.957.251.351.153.9
50.954.249.3-0.5-1.30.0
         Q3 53.155.455.151.949.053.9
50.354.048.6. . . 
2015 Apr. 54.157.058.450.751.353.9
51.055.149.1-1.80.9-3.3
         May 53.456.055.851.651.253.6
51.254.048.7-1.7-0.3-2.6
         June 52.754.657.451.550.654.2
50.553.450.0-0.5-1.30.0
         July 53.455.756.751.550.253.9
50.954.249.10.0-1.50.9
         Aug. 53.555.755.252.948.854.3
50.054.648.8. . . 
         Sep. 52.455.053.351.248.053.6
50.053.248.0. . . 
Sources: Markit (col. 1-9); CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis and ECB calculations (col. 10-12).
1) Global and advanced economies exclude the euro area. Annual and quarterly data are period-on-period percentages; monthly data are 3-month-on-3-month percentages. All dataare seasonally adjusted.2) Excluding the euro area.S 32 Financial developmentsS 3ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics2.1 Money market interest rates(percentages per annum; period averages)   Euro area 1) United StatesJapanOvernight1-month3-month6-month12-month3-month3-monthdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdeposits(EONIA)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)
(LIBOR)(LIBOR)1234567
20120.230.330.570.831.110.430.1920130.090.130.220.340.540.270.1520140.090.130.210.310.480.230.132015 Mar. -0.05-0.010.030.100.210.270.10         Apr. -0.07-0.030.000.070.180.280.10         May -0.11-0.05-0.010.060.170.280.10         June -0.12-0.06-0.010.050.160.280.10         July -0.12-0.07-0.020.050.170.290.10         Aug. -0.12-0.09-0.030.040.160.320.09         Sep. -0.14-0.11-0.040.040.150.330.08Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area, see the General Notes.2.2 Yield curves(End of period; rates in percentages per annum; spreads in percentage points)            Spot rates   Spreads   Instantaneous forward rates   Euro area 1), 2) Euro area 1), 2)United StatesUnited Kingdom
   Euro area 1), 2)3 months1 year2 years5 years10 years10 years10 years10 years1 year2 years5 years10 years
- 1 year- 1 year- 1 year
12345
6789101112
20120.06-0.04-0.010.581.721.761.61
1.48-0.090.171.843.50
20130.080.090.251.072.242.152.91
2.660.180.672.533.88
2014-0.02-0.09-0.120.070.650.741.95
1.45-0.15-0.110.581.77
2015 Mar. -0.21-0.25-0.22-0.080.260.511.69
1.19-0.20-0.200.290.81
         Apr. -0.28-0.26-0.210.030.420.681.81
1.39-0.22-0.080.461.05
         May -0.24-0.25-0.230.060.610.851.87
1.32-0.25-0.140.681.46
         June -0.27-0.26-0.230.190.951.212.09
1.52-0.25-0.101.082.09
         July -0.27-0.29-0.260.080.731.021.87
1.35-0.29-0.130.761.84
         Aug. -0.25-0.27-0.220.140.821.091.84
1.46-0.25-0.070.861.97
         Sep. -0.36-0.27-0.240.040.700.971.73
1.24-0.22-0.170.731.76
Source: ECB.
1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area, see the General Notes.
2) ECB calculations based on underlying data provided by EuroMTS and ratings provided by Fitch Ratings.2.3 Stock market indices(index levels in points; period averages)   Dow Jones EURO STOXX indicesUnitedJapan
      States   Benchmark   Main industry indicesBroad50BasicConsumerConsumerOil andFinancialsIndustrialsTechnologyUtilitiesTelecomsHealth careStandardNikkei


5001234567891011121314
2012239.72,411.9503.7151.9385.7307.2122.1330.2219.2235.9268.5523.31,379.49,102.6
2013281.92,794.0586.3195.0468.2312.8151.5402.7274.1230.6253.4629.41,643.813,577.9
2014318.73,145.3644.3216.6510.6335.5180.0452.9310.8279.2306.7668.11,931.415,460.4
2015 Mar. 373.93,655.3787.2268.9666.9313.5198.9524.1386.2292.9389.2824.62,080.419,197.6
         Apr. 383.33,733.8798.2275.7678.6331.0204.9535.7394.2299.5395.0861.42,094.919,767.9
         May 373.43,617.9765.0268.9662.1326.5199.3522.4389.5294.0389.2827.62,111.919,974.2
         June 364.03,521.8743.2265.5647.4310.3194.5504.7385.0283.0380.7820.42,099.320,403.8
         July 366.33,545.1744.0266.0645.2302.1198.0505.5378.1281.3395.1864.82,094.120,372.6
         Aug. 356.73,444.4711.9261.9615.0287.7193.9504.6359.9274.9390.0856.92,039.919,919.1
         Sep. 330.93,165.5649.6250.9566.4267.2178.5469.7339.5250.8362.6817.41,944.417,944.2
Source: ECB.S 42 Financial developmentsS 4ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics2.4 MFI interest rates on loans to and deposits from households (new business) 1), 2)(Percentages per annum; period average, unless otherwise indicated)            DepositsRevolvingExtended   Loans for consumptionLoans
   Loans for house purchase   loanscredit   
to sole   Over-Redeem-   Withandcard
   By initial periodAPRC
 3)proprietors   By initial periodAPRC
 3)Compositenightable   an agreedoverdraftscredit   of rate fixation
and   of rate fixation
cost-of-at   maturity of:
unincor-borrowingnoticeFloatingOver
poratedFloatingOver 1Over 5Over
indicatorof upUp toOver
rate and1
partner-rate andand upand up10
to 322
up toyear
shipsup toto 5to 10years
monthsyearsyears
1 year1 yearyearsyears
12345678910111213141516
2014 Sep. 0.210.951.171.707.3717.065.356.676.992.942.492.692.612.822.882.66
         Oct. 0.200.941.091.657.2016.965.386.596.982.892.422.632.542.782.812.60
         Nov. 0.200.911.011.667.1817.125.586.666.982.922.412.502.512.722.762.53
         Dec. 0.200.890.961.587.1417.105.076.216.532.752.422.522.532.682.762.49
2015 Jan. 0.190.861.011.947.1817.125.256.426.732.762.302.552.432.442.682.40
         Feb. 0.180.840.971.517.1317.055.186.476.822.792.072.472.322.492.582.37
         Mar. 0.170.820.891.377.1317.055.166.166.492.722.112.452.292.412.552.30
         Apr. 0.160.790.871.157.0317.014.896.136.422.662.012.382.172.362.492.24
         May 0.160.820.831.086.9817.085.046.296.602.672.052.332.092.292.452.17
         June 0.150.780.771.186.9717.024.886.146.452.592.022.252.122.312.482.18
         July 0.150.740.671.146.8317.085.106.206.502.612.052.252.212.362.562.22
         Aug. (p)0.140.670.671.006.8317.035.296.306.622.602.112.282.302.352.602.26
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Including non-profit institutions serving households.3) Annual percentage rate of charge (APRC).2.5 MFI interest rates on loans to and deposits from non-financial corporations (new business) 1), 2)(Percentages per annum; period average, unless otherwise indicated)         DepositsRevolving
   Other loans by size and initial period of rate fixationComposite   loans and
         cost-of-Over-   With an agreedoverdrafts   up to EUR 0.25 million   over EUR 0.25 and up to 1 million   over EUR 1 millionborrowing
night   maturity of:
indicatorFloatingOverOverFloatingOverOverFloatingOverOver
Up toOver
rate3 months1 yearrate3 months1 yearrate3 months1 year
2 years2 years
and up toand up to
and up toand up toand up toand up to
3 months1 year
3 months1 year
3 months1 year
1234567
891011121314
2014 Sep. 0.260.511.463.724.014.033.532.463.012.771.832.382.422.68
         Oct. 0.250.501.373.644.003.943.532.432.902.711.752.252.462.60
         Nov. 0.250.441.163.573.823.863.422.382.842.631.742.172.272.51
         Dec. 0.240.431.263.493.683.753.262.342.782.501.722.162.132.46
2015 Jan. 0.230.441.193.493.783.852.982.312.822.051.662.032.202.46
         Feb. 0.220.351.043.433.573.723.122.242.712.391.511.992.142.37
         Mar. 0.210.321.073.393.453.653.132.162.672.331.612.112.022.36
         Apr. 0.190.300.893.343.463.582.952.182.642.261.611.932.032.33
         May 0.180.300.913.283.373.512.962.152.462.231.571.852.042.27
         June 0.180.311.103.253.193.482.912.092.332.231.591.912.042.26
         July 0.170.320.863.193.273.602.872.072.362.201.501.732.042.19
         Aug. (p)0.170.240.923.163.243.572.912.072.322.221.391.532.032.16
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector.S 52 Financial developmentsS 5ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics2.6 Debt securities issued by euro area residents, by sector of the issuer and initial maturity(EUR billions; transactions during the month and end-of-period outstanding amounts; nominal values)Short-term         Outstanding amounts   Gross issues 1)            TotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General governmentTotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General government
(including   
(including   
Euro-Financial
Non-CentralOther
Euro-Financial
Non-CentralOther
system)corporations
financialgovern-generalsystem)corporations
financialgovern-general
other thanFVCscorporationsmentgovern-
other thanFVCscorporationsmentgovern-
MFIsmentMFIsment12
34
56789
1011121314
20121,426581146- 7555866703491
37- 5210321
20131,247477122- 6752953508314
30- 449921
20141,311545119- 5953850410219
33- 399325
2015 Mar. 1,415604132- 7154366373162
45- 358942
         Apr. 1,408600132- 8053362350158
38- 388235
         May 1,393591132- 8053259326140
36- 368033
         June 1,325560118- 7551756298126
30- 347732
         July 1,328560113- 8152054340145
34- 399131
         Aug. 1,329558117- 7951559296139
27- 227929
Long-term201215,2054,8143,166- 8425,75862425598
45- 168412
201315,1094,4053,087- 9216,06962722270
39- 16899
201415,1344,0483,164- 9936,28664322166
43- 168510
2015 Mar. 15,3664,0263,263- 1,0336,39964428281
62- 1711210
         Apr. 15,2924,0003,229- 1,0336,38964122570
38- 218710
         May 15,3723,9823,252- 1,0366,46264018950
44- 6854
         June 15,3573,9383,268- 1,0316,48563420769
33- 13875
         July 15,3193,9173,289- 1,0406,43763622479
42- 108310
         Aug. 15,2653,8953,249- 1,0406,44463711342
20- 4444
Source: ECB.1) For the purpose of comparison, annual data refer to the average monthly figure over the year.2.7 Growth rates and outstanding amounts of debt securities and listed shares(EUR billions; percentage changes)Oustanding amount         Debt securities   Listed shares      TotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General governmentTotalMFIsFinancialNon-
(including   
corporationsfinancial
Eurosystem)Financial
Non-CentralOther
other thancorporations
corporationsfinancialgovernmentgeneral
MFIsother thanFVCscorporations
governmentMFIs1234
56789
1011
201216,631.55,395.83,312.1.917.06,316.2690.44,600.5404.7617.93,577.9
201316,355.94,881.73,208.7.987.96,597.8679.85,649.1569.1751.04,329.0
201416,444.64,593.23,282.6.1,052.06,823.7693.05,961.7591.1790.24,580.4
2015 Mar. 16,781.24,630.43,394.9.1,104.26,941.6710.17,067.5688.8935.65,443.1
         Apr. 16,700.04,600.23,361.2.1,113.06,921.8703.66,971.2683.9909.25,378.1
         May 16,765.54,572.23,383.9.1,115.76,994.0699.76,994.1675.5902.45,416.3
         June 16,682.24,498.33,386.1.1,105.97,001.4690.56,813.1664.3880.55,268.3
         July 16,646.64,476.63,401.9.1,121.26,956.9690.07,113.7695.0914.75,504.0
         Aug. 16,594.04,452.73,366.7.1,118.76,959.8696.16,575.9630.6849.85,095.5
Growth rate20121.3-1.8-0.3.14.42.56.10.94.92.00.4
2013-1.4-8.9-3.4.8.14.5-1.10.97.20.20.3
2014-0.6-7.70.3.4.93.11.21.57.21.60.8
2015 Mar. -0.1-7.02.6.5.32.61.81.56.81.40.8
         Apr. -0.2-6.72.3.6.72.11.91.56.81.10.8
         May -0.7-7.10.7.5.82.11.41.35.81.20.7
         June -1.0-7.61.3.4.61.6-0.81.04.10.60.7
         July -1.2-7.40.5.4.41.5-0.61.03.30.30.9
         Aug. -0.9-7.20.5.4.51.8-0.21.03.30.50.8
Source: ECB.S 62 Financial developmentsS 6ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics2.8 Effective exchange rates 1)(period averages; index: 1999 Q1=100)         EER-19   EER-38NominalReal CPIReal PPIReal GDPReal ULCM
 2)Real ULCTNominalReal CPI
deflator12345678
201297.695.093.388.2100.395.8
107.092.5
2013101.298.296.791.4102.998.9
111.995.6
2014101.897.996.791.6103.3100.4
114.796.1
2014 Q4 99.094.994.389.2100.597.7
112.393.5
2015 Q1 93.089.289.484.094.092.2
106.488.3
         Q2 91.287.588.282.492.190.1
104.486.3
         Q3 92.788.789.8...107.688.6
2015 Apr. 89.786.186.9- - - 102.484.8
         May 91.687.988.6- - - 104.786.6
         June 92.388.589.1- - - 106.087.6
         July 91.387.588.2- - - 105.186.7
         Aug. 93.089.090.2- - - 108.189.0
         Sep. 93.889.691.2- - - 109.690.2
Percentage change versus previous month2015 Sep. 0.80.71.0- - - 1.5
1.3Percentage change versus previous year2015 Sep. -6.1-6.5-4.1- - - -2.3
-4.0Source: ECB.1) For a definition of the trading partner groups and other information see the General Notes to the Statistics Bulletin.
2) ULCM-deflated series are available only for the EER-19 trading partner group.2.9 Bilateral exchange rates(period averages; units of national currency per euro)ChineseCroatianCzechDanishHungarianJapanesePolishPoundRomanianSwedishSwissUS
renminbikunakorunakroneforintyenzlotysterlingleukronafrancDollar
123456789101112
20128.1057.52225.1497.444289.249102.4924.1850.8114.45938.7041.2051.285
20138.1657.57925.9807.458296.873129.6634.1970.8494.41908.6521.2311.328
20148.1867.63427.5367.455308.706140.3064.1840.8064.44379.0991.2151.329
2014 Q4 7.6827.66527.6307.442308.527142.7544.2110.7894.43369.2721.2051.250
2015 Q1 7.0237.68127.6247.450308.889134.1214.1930.7434.45169.3801.0721.126
         Q2 6.8577.57427.3797.462306.100134.2894.0880.7214.44429.3001.0411.105
         Q3 7.0087.57827.0757.462312.095135.8634.1880.7174.42909.4291.0721.112
2015 Apr. 6.6867.59027.4397.466299.429128.9354.0180.7214.41559.3251.0381.078
         May 6.9167.55927.3977.461306.327134.7484.0810.7214.44779.3041.0391.115
         June 6.9597.57227.3077.460311.960138.7404.1590.7214.46719.2721.0451.121
         July 6.8277.58627.0947.462311.531135.6814.1520.7074.43919.3861.0491.100
         Aug. 7.0637.55827.0417.463311.614137.1244.1950.7144.42359.5151.0781.114
         Sep. 7.1467.58927.0897.461313.145134.8514.2180.7314.42369.3921.0911.122
Percentage change versus previous month2015 Sep. 1.20.40.20.00.5-1.70.52.40.0-1.31.30.7
Percentage change versus previous year2015 Sep. -9.8-0.5-1.80.20.0-2.60.7-7.60.32.2-9.6-13.0
Source: ECB.S 72 Financial developmentsS 7ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics2.10 Euro area balance of payments, financial account(EUR billions, unless otherwise indicated; outstanding amounts at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts (international investment position)               Total 1)    Direct   PortfolioNet   Other investmentReserveMemo:
      investment   investmentfinancial   
assetsGross
derivativesexternalAssetsLiabilitiesNetAssetsLiabilitiesAssetsLiabilities
AssetsLiabilities
debt123456789101112
2014 Q3 19,133.320,292.0-1,158.87,740.15,925.76,234.59,565.8-54.84,616.44,800.5597.011,849.1
         Q4 19,871.720,989.4-1,117.78,249.46,410.56,467.39,823.6-43.14,585.74,755.3612.312,038.7
2015 Q1 21,840.322,833.9-993.68,952.86,623.57,225.111,054.9-69.35,041.35,155.5690.412,995.0
         Q2 21,378.922,271.8-892.98,804.96,673.77,102.310,627.9-22.34,835.54,970.2658.512,649.4
Outstanding amounts as a percentage of GDP2015 Q2 208.4217.1-8.785.865.169.2103.6-0.247.148.56.4123.3
Transactions2014 Q3 210.9103.1107.875.466.398.0-16.417.821.153.2-1.4-
         Q4 82.022.060.067.878.7103.512.310.0-102.1-69.02.9-
2015 Q1 548.9511.437.6195.788.2137.1250.722.6187.8172.55.7-
         Q2 33.08.724.384.5125.0122.9-3.33.8-175.7-112.9-2.5-
2015 Mar. 143.834.6109.3111.319.950.169.48.4-26.2-54.70.3-
         Apr. 101.3157.1-55.817.232.126.21.95.156.7123.2-3.9-
         May 1.6-19.120.739.545.364.419.22.9-103.4-83.6-1.8-
         June -69.9-129.259.427.947.732.3-24.4-4.3-129.0-152.53.2-
         July 58.112.345.823.0-7.2-3.2-66.110.534.885.6-7.0-
         Aug. -6.1-10.13.9-0.3-3.29.2-20.6-7.2-9.213.71.4-
12-month cumulated transactions2015 Aug. 789.2535.8253.5399.8301.5427.8145.153.2-90.189.2-1.5-
12-month cumulated transactions as a percentage of GDP2015 Aug. 7.75.22.53.92.94.21.40.5-0.90.90.0-
Source: ECB.1) Net financial derivatives are included in total assets.S 83 Economic activityS 8ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics3.1 GDP and expenditure components(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Current prices (EUR billions)   GDP      Total   Domestic demand   External balanceTotalPrivateGovernment
   Gross fixed capital formationChanges inTotalExportsImports
consumptionconsumption
inventoriesTotalTotalIntellectual
constructionmachineryproperty products
12
345
67
89101112
20129,849.19,581.85,540.22,066.81,984.81,033.5585.0
361.5-10.0267.44,294.44,027.0
20139,952.89,610.65,566.22,096.31,943.11,004.1571.6
362.35.0342.24,369.84,027.7
201410,126.99,738.95,643.02,130.51,976.61,007.1592.5
371.7-11.1388.04,511.34,123.3
2014 Q3 2,537.62,439.21,413.8534.9496.0251.7149.3
93.7-5.598.41,139.01,040.6
         Q4 2,552.82,446.41,422.6534.9500.7253.4151.9
94.1-11.8106.41,149.31,042.9
2015 Q1 2,575.92,462.41,424.8539.5507.7256.2154.9
95.3-9.7113.51,159.61,046.0
         Q2 2,593.92,473.01,437.4541.4506.4253.7156.0
95.3-12.1120.91,188.11,067.2
as a percentage of GDP2014100.096.255.721.019.610.05.9
3.7-0.23.8- - 
Chain-linked volumes (prices for the previous year)quarter-on-quarter percentage changes2014 Q3 0.30.30.50.20.3-0.11.0
0.6- - 1.51.7
         Q4 0.40.40.60.20.6
0.60.8
0.2- - 0.90.9
2015 Q1 0.50.70.50.61.4
1.02.3
0.8- - 1.01.5
         Q2 0.40.00.40.3-0.5-1.10.4
-0.2- - 1.61.0
annual percentage changes2012-0.8-2.3-1.2-0.1-3.6-4.4-4.7
1.9- - 2.7-0.8
2013-0.3-0.7-0.60.2-2.6-3.6-1.9
-0.8- - 2.11.3
20140.90.90.90.81.2-0.43.9
2.0- - 3.94.2
2014 Q3 0.80.51.00.80.7-1.83.9
2.5- - 4.34.0
         Q4 0.91.01.41.00.8-0.42.0
2.3- - 4.34.8
2015 Q1 1.21.41.71.21.8
0.04.9
2.1- - 4.85.5
         Q2 1.51.41.91.31.9
0.54.4
1.5- - 5.25.2
contributions to quarter-on-quarter percentage changes in GDP; percentage points2014 Q3 0.30.30.30.10.1
0.00.1
0.0-0.10.0- - 
         Q4 0.40.40.30.00.1
0.10.0
0.0-0.10.0- - 
2015 Q1 0.50.70.30.10.3
0.10.1
0.00.0-0.2- - 
         Q2 0.40.00.20.1-0.1-0.10.0
0.0-0.10.3- - 
contributions to annual percentage changes in GDP; percentage points2012-0.8-2.3-0.70.0-0.7-1.9-1.2
0.3-0.91.5- - 
2013-0.3-0.6-0.40.0-0.5-1.5-0.4
-0.10.20.4- - 
20140.90.80.50.20.2-0.20.9
0.3-0.10.0- - 
2014 Q3 0.80.50.50.20.1-0.20.2
0.1-0.30.2- - 
         Q4 0.91.00.80.20.2
0.00.1
0.1-0.2-0.1- - 
2015 Q1 1.21.41.00.20.4
0.00.3
0.1-0.2-0.1- - 
         Q2 1.51.31.10.30.4
0.00.3
0.1-0.30.2- - 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.S 93 Economic activityS 9ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics3.2 Value added by economic activity(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Current prices (EUR billions)   Gross value added (basic prices)Taxes lesssubsidiesTotalAgriculture,ManufacturingConst-Trade,Infor-FinanceRealProfessional,Public ad-Arts, enter-on
forestry andenergy andructiontransport,mationandestatebusiness andministration,tainmentproducts
fishingutilities
accom-and com-insurance
supporteducation,and other
modationmunica-
serviceshealth andservices
and foodtion
social workservices12345678
9101112
20128,854.7148.71,733.6466.71,674.8410.7441.31,016.3929.81,719.3313.4994.4
20138,945.3152.91,737.8457.31,690.3414.0443.21,035.0945.11,751.1318.71,007.5
20149,090.7146.61,761.7458.21,716.5418.3455.01,055.9968.11,785.4324.91,036.2
2014 Q3 2,278.036.3442.4114.0430.1104.6114.0264.5242.9447.881.5259.6
         Q4 2,290.635.3444.5114.9434.5105.4113.7266.1245.1449.281.9262.2
2015 Q1 2,316.435.9450.6116.4439.7106.1115.7267.4248.1453.982.5259.5
         Q2 2,328.236.3453.9115.8443.1106.7115.5269.2250.4454.382.9265.6
as a percentage of value added2014100.01.619.45.018.94.65.011.610.619.63.6
- Chain-linked volumes (prices for the previous year)quarter-on-quarter percentage changes2014 Q3 0.31.2
0.2-0.60.50.80.20.3
0.60.10.50.0
         Q4 0.3-2.0
0.10.50.60.50.20.3
0.50.20.21.2
2015 Q1 0.61.2
0.80.80.70.70.60.2
1.00.10.2-0.1
         Q2 0.30.0
0.4-0.50.40.50.30.3
0.50.30.00.9
annual percentage changes2012-0.6-4.2-0.9-6.1-0.22.5-0.30.0
-0.60.1-0.7-2.6
2013-0.23.5-0.4-3.2-1.01.4-1.21.2
0.10.3-0.1-1.2
20140.93.4
0.5-0.91.32.0-0.41.3
1.50.60.60.8
2014 Q3 0.84.5
0.6-2.01.12.2-0.51.3
1.40.50.50.5
         Q4 0.80.0
0.2-1.41.42.00.21.2
2.00.50.71.9
2015 Q1 1.20.4
0.9-0.81.82.70.61.2
2.40.60.72.0
         Q2 1.50.4
1.40.12.32.51.31.1
2.60.70.92.0
contributions to quarter-on-quarter percentage changes in value added; percentage points2014 Q3 0.30.0
0.00.00.10.00.00.0
0.10.00.0
-          Q4 0.30.0
0.00.00.10.00.00.0
0.10.00.0
- 2015 Q1 0.60.0
0.20.00.10.00.00.0
0.10.00.0
-          Q2 0.30.0
0.10.00.10.00.00.0
0.10.10.0
- contributions to annual percentage changes in value added; percentage points2012-0.6-0.1-0.2-0.30.00.10.00.0
-0.10.00.0
- 2013-0.20.1-0.1-0.2-0.20.1-0.10.1
0.00.10.0
- 20140.90.1
0.10.00.20.10.00.1
0.20.10.0
- 2014 Q3 0.80.1
0.1-0.10.20.10.00.2
0.10.10.0
-          Q4 0.80.0
0.0-0.10.30.10.00.1
0.20.10.0
- 2015 Q1 1.20.0
0.20.00.30.10.00.1
0.30.10.0
-          Q2 1.50.0
0.30.00.40.10.10.1
0.30.10.0
- Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.S 103 Economic activityS 10ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics3.3 Employment 1)(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Persons employed       Total   By employment
   By economic activity   status   Employ-Self-Agricul-Manufac-Con-Trade,Infor-FinanceRealProfessional,Public adminis-Arts,
eesemployedture,turing,struc-transport,mationandestatebusiness andtration, edu-entertainment
forestryenergytionaccom-andinsur-
supportcation, healthand other
andand
modationcom-ance
servicesandservices
fishingutilities
and foodmunica-
social workservicestion
12345678910
111213as a percentage of total persons employed2012100.084.915.13.415.46.424.82.72.71.012.7
23.87.02013100.085.015.03.415.36.224.82.72.71.012.9
24.07.12014100.085.114.93.415.26.024.82.72.71.013.0
24.07.1annual percentage changes2012-0.4-0.5-0.1-1.2-0.7-4.5-0.61.2-0.40.3
0.80.00.42013-0.7-0.6-0.7-1.3-1.4-4.4-0.60.2-1.1-1.0
0.30.00.420140.60.8-0.40.80.0-1.70.80.9-1.10.7
2.00.70.92014 Q3 0.81.0-0.60.30.2-1.21.11.2-0.90.7
2.20.80.9         Q4 0.81.1-0.50.50.4-1.50.90.7-1.01.2
2.50.62.02015 Q1 0.81.0-0.2-0.20.30.11.20.4-0.71.4
2.60.50.6         Q2 0.91.00.20.30.31.00.80.70.02.1
2.40.51.1Hours workedas a percentage of total hours worked2012100.080.020.04.415.77.225.82.82.81.012.5
21.66.32013100.080.020.04.415.76.825.82.82.81.012.6
21.76.42014100.080.219.84.415.66.725.82.92.71.012.7
21.86.3annual percentage changes2012-1.8-1.8-1.6-2.2-2.3-7.1-2.10.6-1.1-0.8
-0.4-0.6-0.62013-1.3-1.3-1.3-1.6-1.6-5.6-1.2-0.3-1.5-1.9
-0.4-0.5-0.720140.60.9-0.50.40.4-1.60.71.0-1.40.1
1.90.90.32014 Q3 0.51.0-1.10.00.3-1.80.81.1-1.2-0.3
2.00.60.2         Q4 1.01.3-0.11.41.0-1.00.91.3-1.41.0
2.70.81.52015 Q1 0.70.9-0.21.00.5-0.10.70.6-1.01.9
2.20.30.8         Q2 1.01.10.31.10.71.50.51.3-0.12.7
2.70.51.0Hours worked per person employedannual percentage changes2012-1.3-1.3-1.4-1.0-1.6-2.7-1.5-0.6-0.7-1.1
-1.2-0.5-1.02013-0.6-0.7-0.5-0.3-0.2-1.3-0.6-0.5-0.5-0.9
-0.7-0.5-1.120140.00.10.0-0.40.40.2-0.10.1-0.3-0.6
-0.10.2-0.52014 Q3 -0.20.0-0.5-0.40.1-0.6-0.20.0-0.3-1.0
-0.1-0.1-0.7         Q4 0.10.20.50.90.60.5-0.10.6-0.5-0.2
0.20.2-0.62015 Q1 -0.1-0.10.01.30.2-0.2-0.40.3-0.30.4
-0.4-0.20.2         Q2 0.10.20.10.80.50.6-0.30.5-0.10.6
0.30.0-0.1Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Data for employment are based on the ESA 2010.S 11
3 Economic activityS 11ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics3.4 Labour force, unemployment and job vacancies(seasonally adjusted, unless otherwise indicated)LabourUnder-
   UnemploymentJobforce,employ-   
      vacancymillions 1)ment,   TotalLong-term
   By age   By genderrate 2)% ofunemploy-   
         labourMillions% ofment,   Adult
   Youth   Male   Femaleforce 1)labour% of
forcelabourMillions% ofMillions% ofMillions% ofMillions% of% of total
force 1)labourlabourlabourlabourposts
forceforceforceforce1234567891011121314
% of total  100.0  81.3 18.7 53.6 46.4  
in 2013              
2012159.1114.018.18811.45.214.63210.13.55623.69.75811.38.43011.51.6
2013159.3344.619.23112.05.915.63810.83.59324.310.30711.98.92412.11.5
2014160.3084.618.62511.66.115.21310.43.41223.79.91911.58.70611.81.7
2014 Q3 160.4554.418.54111.65.915.14410.43.39723.69.81611.38.72511.81.6
         Q4 160.9564.618.40311.56.115.08210.33.32123.29.75511.38.64811.71.8
2015 Q1 160.0894.717.99011.25.914.75010.13.24022.79.57011.18.41911.41.7
         Q2 160.4464.617.78911.15.714.59210.03.19822.59.45410.98.33511.21.7
2015 Mar. - - 17.92211.2- 14.68910.03.23322.79.53511.08.38711.3- 
         Apr. - - 17.80411.1- 14.58510.03.22022.59.45210.98.35211.3- 
         May - - 17.76611.1- 14.58310.03.18322.59.47011.08.29611.2- 
         June - - 17.79711.1- 14.60710.03.19022.69.44010.98.35711.3- 
         July - - 17.60411.0- 14.4889.93.11622.29.33710.88.26711.2- 
         Aug. - - 17.60211.0- 14.4719.93.13122.39.30610.88.29611.2- 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Not seasonally adjusted.
2) The job vacancy rate is equal to the number of job vacancies divided by the sum of the number of occupied posts and the number of job vacancies, expressed as a percentage.3.5 Short-term business statistics   Industrial productionCon-ECB indicator
   Retail salesNew      structionon industrial
passenger   Total   Main Industrial Groupingsproduc-new ordersTotalFood,Non-foodFuelcar regis-
   (excluding construction)   tionbeverages,trationstobaccoManu-Inter-CapitalConsumerEnergy
facturingmediategoodsgoods
goods1234567
8910111213
% of total100.086.033.629.222.514.7100.0100.0100.039.351.59.1100.0
in 2010             
annual percentage changes2012-2.4-2.6-4.4-1.0-2.5-0.1-5.8
-3.8-1.6-1.3-1.5-5.0-11.1
2013-0.7-0.7-1.0-0.6-0.4-0.8-2.3
-0.1-0.8-0.9-0.6-0.9-4.4
20140.71.71.11.72.6-5.51.7
3.31.30.32.30.33.7
2014 Q4 0.30.9-0.40.82.6-3.2-0.8
2.91.90.72.81.41.6
2015 Q1 1.61.2-0.11.12.34.6-1.5
1.12.11.03.12.29.0
         Q2 1.31.70.92.80.9-1.1-0.6
4.92.31.33.22.66.9
         Q3 . . . . . . . . . . . . 9.4
2015 Apr. 0.80.9-0.12.2-0.10.7-1.1
2.92.41.43.22.86.4
         May 1.62.32.04.00.4-3.60.3
4.32.51.83.32.26.8
         June 1.51.80.62.22.4-0.3-1.1
7.51.90.63.12.77.5
         July 1.71.50.01.72.83.9-0.3
3.73.02.13.53.19.9
         Aug. 0.91.2-0.62.81.1-1.6-6.0
. 2.32.52.03.68.3
         Sep. . . . . . . . . . . . . 9.8
month-on-month percentage changes (s.a.)2015 Apr. 0.00.30.00.5-0.4-1.3-0.4
2.00.41.00.10.70.8
         May -0.20.10.21.1-0.4-2.60.2
-0.10.20.30.3-0.5-1.5
         June -0.3-0.8-0.4-1.5-0.52.9-1.1
2.50.0-0.50.20.51.6
         July 0.80.8-0.41.61.22.10.4
-0.90.60.40.50.32.1
         Aug. -0.5-0.30.2-1.0-0.2-3.0-0.2
. 0.00.8-0.31.8-0.8
         Sep. . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.8
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations, ECB experimental statistics (col. 8) and European Automobile Manufacturers Association (col. 13).S 123 Economic activityS 12ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics3.6 Opinion surveys(seasonally adjusted)         (percentage balances, unless otherwise indicated)   (diffusion indices)      Economic   Manufacturing industryConsumerConstructionRetail   Service industriesPurchasingManu-BusinessComposite


indicatorIndustrialCapacityindicatorindicatorconfid-ServicesCapacityIndex (PMI)outputfor
(long-termconfidenceutilisation
enceconfidenceutilisationfor manu-
servicesaverageindicator(%)
indicatorindicator(%)facturing
= 100)123
456
789101112
1999-13100.2-6.180.9-12.8-13.8-8.76.6
- 51.052.452.952.7
201290.5-11.678.9-22.0-27.7-15.0-6.586.546.246.347.647.2
201393.8-9.178.7-18.7-29.2-12.2-5.487.149.650.649.349.7
2014101.6-3.980.4-10.1-27.4-3.24.887.651.853.352.552.7
2014 Q4 100.8-4.580.8-11.3-24.3-5.15.387.950.451.251.751.5
2015 Q1 102.6-4.081.1-6.3-24.9-1.65.688.251.452.653.653.3
         Q2 103.7-3.281.1-5.3-24.9-0.27.688.352.353.454.153.9
         Q3 104.6-2.9. -7.1-23.32.910.5
. 52.353.654.053.9
2015 Apr. 103.8-3.281.2-4.6-25.5-0.87.088.552.053.454.153.9
         May 103.8-3.0- -5.6-25.01.57.9
- 52.253.353.853.6
         June 103.5-3.4- -5.6-24.2-1.37.9
- 52.553.654.454.2
         July 104.0-2.981.1-7.2-23.81.18.988.152.453.654.053.9
         Aug. 104.1-3.7- -6.9-22.73.510.1
- 52.353.954.454.3
         Sep. 105.6-2.2- -7.1-23.34.112.4
- 52.053.453.753.6
Sources: European Commission (Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs) (col. 1-8) and Markit (col. 9-12).3.7 Summary accounts for households and non-financial corporations(current prices, unless otherwise indicated; not seasonally adjusted)         Households   Non-financial corporationsSavingDebtReal grossFinancialNon-financialNetHous-ProfitSavingDebtFinancialNon-financialFinan-
ratioratiodisposableinvestmentinvestmentworthingshare
 3)ratioratio
 4)investmentinvestmentcing
(gross) 1)income(gross) 2)wealth(net)(gross)                                                             Percentage of      Percentage of netPercent-
      gross disposable   Annual percentage changes   value addedage of   Annual percentage changes
   income (adjusted)      GDP   12
34567891011
1213
201212.597.4-1.81.7-5.10.6-2.330.61.1134.41.6-6.71.2
201312.896.0-0.41.5-4.10.4-2.232.13.1132.52.5-1.01.3
201412.795.10.71.7
1.02.30.732.64.0134.01.8
3.50.9
2014 Q3 12.895.01.31.7-0.92.70.432.13.4132.72.1
3.01.0
         Q4 12.795.10.91.7
1.02.30.732.64.0134.31.8
2.10.9
2015 Q1 12.794.71.91.9-0.33.81.332.74.2136.22.6
2.11.5
         Q2 12.7.2.01.7-0.2..33.34.9136.23.2
6.01.6
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.1) Based on four-quarter cumulated sums of both saving and gross disposable income (adjusted for the change in the net equity of households in pension fund reserves).2) Financial assets (net of financial liabilities) and non-financial assets. Non-financial assets consist mainly of housing wealth (residential structures and land). They also includenon-financial assets of unincorporated enterprises classified within the household sector.3) The profit share uses net entrepreneurial income, which is broadly equivalent to current profits in business accounting. 
4) Based on the outstanding amount of loans, debt securities, trade credits and pension scheme liabilities.S 133 Economic activityS 13ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics3.8 Euro area balance of payments, current and capital accounts(EUR billions; seasonally adjusted unless otherwise indicated; transactions)         Current account   Capital                  account 1)   Total   Goods   Services   Primary income   Secondary income   
CreditDebitNetCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebit
12345678910111213
2014 Q3 854.3788.066.3494.2432.4177.1158.2159.0142.424.055.06.73.0
         Q4 864.3794.469.8508.6434.1179.2164.5152.2136.724.259.112.76.0
2015 Q1 875.6794.481.1512.0436.0184.2169.0153.8130.025.659.48.77.5
         Q2 891.1812.179.0525.0442.6186.8171.0152.7138.226.760.39.637.2
2015 Mar. 297.1272.824.3172.4151.262.157.954.144.08.619.83.62.4
         Apr. 298.2271.127.2174.9147.761.757.053.146.08.420.32.81.2
         May 297.6272.624.9174.7148.163.056.950.446.49.421.23.61.5
         June 295.3268.426.9175.3146.862.057.149.145.88.918.73.334.4
         July 295.6270.025.6174.3146.061.958.151.046.58.319.43.21.6
         Aug. 285.9268.117.7164.3143.162.358.050.046.39.220.73.21.1
12-month cumulated transactions2015 Aug. 3,503.43,200.7302.72,055.01,746.8733.1673.5613.0543.6102.2236.939.354.4
12-month cumulated transactions as a percentage of GDP2015 Aug. 34.131.23.020.017.07.16.66.05.31.02.30.40.5
1) The capital account is not seasonally adjusted.3.9 Euro area external trade in goods 1), values and volumes by product group 2)(seasonally adjusted, unless otherwise indicated)Values (EUR billions; annual percentage changes for columns 1 and 2)            Total (n.s.a.)   Exports (f.o.b.)   Imports (c.i.f.)            TotalMemo item:   Total   Memo items:ExportsImportsIntermediateCapitalConsump-Manu-IntermediateCapitalConsump-Manu-Oil
goodsgoodstionfacturing
goodsgoodstionfacturing
goodsgoods123
45
678
91011
1213
2014 Q3 3.00.6486.6236.197.3139.6398.1440.6270.262.2101.7288.373.8
         Q4 4.60.2498.8237.5102.8145.2409.7436.4260.563.7103.2293.966.1
2015 Q1 5.11.8504.0240.7104.2148.6420.3445.1259.070.2109.1314.058.1
         Q2 8.03.8517.3243.3105.5154.2430.6453.0265.069.4111.1315.756.9
2015 Mar. 11.19.5171.681.734.951.3143.3154.289.924.437.7108.920.1
         Apr. 8.84.9173.581.835.651.4144.1151.889.123.836.5105.519.2
         May 2.70.0170.780.734.551.0141.3149.786.822.636.9103.318.8
         June 12.56.6173.180.835.551.9145.2151.489.023.037.7106.918.9
         July 6.60.6171.779.335.052.5142.9149.385.723.037.5105.417.9
         Aug. 5.53.0169.5
. . . 139.8149.7
. . . 103.8. 
Volume indices (2000 = 100; annual percentage changes for columns 1 and 2)2014 Q3 1.12.5114.6112.7114.8116.4114.7101.9101.4101.7103.7105.189.4
         Q4 3.12.1117.4113.7119.9121.1117.0102.3102.099.2102.8104.397.3
2015 Q1 2.65.1117.2114.7119.1122.1117.8105.5105.8104.6105.4108.0110.6
         Q2 3.12.2117.4113.8118.7121.7118.1103.5103.7100.1105.0106.293.8
2015 Feb. 1.64.9117.6115.2120.8122.1118.8105.1105.7105.7104.3108.1108.3
         Mar. 7.110.7118.3115.8118.3124.3119.3107.2107.6104.9108.3110.6106.5
         Apr. 3.42.9118.4114.7120.0122.6118.7104.1104.7102.8103.5106.198.1
         May -2.5-2.4116.0112.9116.7120.2116.1102.2101.198.8104.3104.490.2
         June 8.26.0117.9113.8119.5122.2119.4104.1105.398.7107.1108.293.1
         July 3.11.5117.5112.2118.0124.9117.9104.7103.5102.4107.3107.794.1
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.initions.2) Product groups as classified in the Broad Economic Categories.S 144 Prices and costsS 14ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics4.1 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1)(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)            Total   Total (s.a.; percentage change vis-à-vis previous period)   Memo item:
   Administered pricesIndex:   TotalGoodsServicesTotalProcessedUnpro-Non-energyEnergyServices
2005foodcessedindustrial(n.s.a.)
Total HICPAdminis-
= 100Totalfoodgoods
excludingtered
excludingadministeredprices
food andpricesenergy12345678
91011
1213
% of total100.0100.069.756.543.5100.012.27.526.310.643.587.112.9
in 2015             
2012115.62.51.53.01.8-
--
---
2.33.8
2013117.21.41.11.31.4-
--
---
1.22.1
2014117.70.40.8-0.21.2-
--
---
0.21.9
2014 Q4 117.80.20.7-0.61.2-0.20.10.40.0-3.00.2
-0.11.7
2015 Q1 116.8-0.30.7-1.41.1-0.30.20.50.1-4.20.2
-0.51.2
         Q2 118.40.20.8-0.51.10.50.30.70.22.40.4
0.10.9
         Q3 117.80.10.9-0.81.20.00.10.50.1-2.50.4
0.00.8
2015 Apr. 118.20.00.6-0.71.00.10.20.40.10.10.0
-0.10.9
         May 118.50.30.9-0.41.30.3-0.10.30.10.90.3
0.31.0
         June 118.50.20.8-0.41.10.00.1-0.10.0-0.10.0
0.10.9
         July 117.70.21.0-0.51.20.00.0-0.60.1-0.70.2
0.10.9
         Aug. 117.70.10.9-0.71.2-0.10.11.2-0.1-2.20.1
0.00.9
         Sep. 118.0-0.10.9-1.11.2-0.10.00.6-0.1-1.70.0
-0.20.7
         Goods   Services            Food (including alcoholic   Industrial goods   HousingTransportCommuni-RecreationMiscel-
   beverages and tobacco)      cationandlaneous
personalTotalProcessedUnpro-TotalNon-energyEnergy
Rentsfoodcessed
industrialfoodgoods14151617
1819202122232425
% of total19.712.27.536.9
26.310.610.76.47.33.114.87.5
in 2015            
20123.13.13.03.0
1.27.61.81.52.9-3.22.22.0
20132.72.23.50.6
0.60.61.71.52.4-4.22.20.7
20140.51.2-0.8-0.5
0.1-1.91.71.41.7-2.81.51.3
2014 Q4 0.30.7-0.3-1.1
-0.1-3.61.61.41.6-2.61.41.4
2015 Q1 0.30.50.1-2.3
-0.1-7.71.31.31.4-1.91.31.2
         Q2 1.10.71.8-1.4
0.2-5.31.21.21.2-0.91.41.2
         Q3 1.20.62.1-1.8
0.4-7.21.21.11.4-0.41.61.0
2015 Apr. 1.00.71.3-1.6
0.1-5.81.21.30.7-1.21.21.2
         May 1.20.62.1-1.2
0.2-4.81.21.21.6-0.81.81.3
         June 1.10.71.9-1.3
0.3-5.11.21.21.2-0.81.31.1
         July 0.90.61.4-1.3
0.4-5.61.21.11.5-0.71.61.0
         Aug. 1.30.62.4-1.8
0.4-7.21.21.11.2-0.41.71.0
         Sep. 1.40.62.7-2.4
0.3-8.91.31.11.4-0.11.61.1
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.S 154 Prices and costsS 15ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics4.2 Industry, construction and property prices(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)   Industrial producer prices excluding constructionCon-ResidentialExperimental
      structionpropertyindicator of
Total   Total
   Industry excluding construction and energyEnergy
prices 1)commercial(index:   property2010 = 100)Manu-TotalIntermediateCapital   Consumer goods
prices 1)facturinggoodsgoods
TotalFood,Non-
beveragesfood
and tobacco1234
567
891011
1213% of total100.0100.078.072.129.320.022.713.88.927.9   
in 2010             
2012108.72.82.01.4
0.71.02.53.50.96.61.5
-1.7-0.12013108.5-0.2-0.10.4-0.60.61.72.60.3-1.60.3
-2.0-1.12014106.9-1.5-0.9-0.3-1.10.40.1-0.20.3-4.40.3
0.21.12014 Q3 106.8-1.4-0.6-0.1-0.60.5-0.1-0.50.3-4.50.4
0.41.7         Q4 106.0-1.9-1.6-0.3-0.70.6-0.6-1.20.2-5.80.2
0.72.42015 Q1 104.5-2.9-2.6-0.6-1.50.7-0.7-1.30.2-8.50.3
1.02.5         Q2 104.9-2.1-1.6-0.3-0.70.7-0.8-1.40.0-6.50.4
1.03.22015 Mar. 104.9-2.3-1.9-0.5-1.20.7-0.6-1.10.3-6.8- - - 
         Apr. 104.8-2.1-1.7-0.4-0.80.8-0.8-1.40.1-6.4- - - 
         May 104.9-2.0-1.5-0.3-0.60.7-0.9-1.3-0.1-6.2- - - 
         June 104.9-2.1-1.7-0.4-0.60.7-0.8-1.40.0-6.8- - - 
         July 104.7-2.1-2.0-0.4-0.70.7-0.8-1.40.1-6.5- - - 
         Aug. 103.8-2.6-2.7-0.5-1.10.6-0.7-1.20.1-8.2- - - 
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations, and ECB calculations based on MSCI data and national sources (col. 13).1) Experimental data based on non-harmonised sources (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/html/experiment.en.html for further details).4.3 Commodity prices and GDP deflators(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)   GDP deflatorsOil prices   Non-energy commodity prices  (EUR)
   (EUR per      TotalTotal   Domestic demand
Exports 1)Imports 1)barrel)   Import-weighted
 2)   Use-weighted 2)(s.a.;index:TotalPrivateGovern-Gross
TotalFoodNon-foodTotalFoodNon-food
2010consump-mentfixed
= 100)tionconsump-capital
tionformation
123456789101112131415
% of total         100.035.065.0100.045.055.0
               
2012102.41.31.51.90.81.21.92.586.6-7.20.2-10.5-3.15.8-9.1
2013103.71.31.01.11.20.5-0.3-1.381.7-9.0-13.4-6.9-8.3-10.1-6.9
2014104.60.90.50.50.80.5-0.7-1.774.5-8.8-1.6-12.1-4.60.7-8.7
2014 Q4 105.00.90.30.30.80.6-0.4-1.961.5-5.56.2-10.81.39.3-4.7
2015 Q1 105.41.00.0-0.20.70.6-0.2-2.649.0-0.48.7-4.95.611.60.7
         Q2 105.71.20.40.30.70.90.9-1.157.4-0.52.1-2.04.05.62.6
         Q3 . . . . . . . . 46.1-6.56.5-13.1-3.35.8-10.6
2015 Apr. - - - - - - - - 56.6-1.43.4-4.04.97.82.4
         May - - - - - - - - 58.9-0.2-0.3-0.13.83.34.2
         June - - - - - - - - 56.7-0.13.1-1.93.35.91.1
         July - - - - - - - - 51.7-3.611.1-11.00.59.8-7.1
         Aug. - - - - - - - - 43.0-8.14.4-14.4-4.45.2-12.1
         Sep. - - - - - - - - 43.3-7.93.9-13.8-6.02.4-12.6
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations and Thomson Reuters (col. 9).1) Deflators for exports and imports refer to goods and services and include cross-border trade within the euro area.
2) Import-weighted: weighted according to 2004-06 average import structure; use-weighted: weighted according to 2004-06 average domestic demand structure.S 164 Prices and costsS 16ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics4.4 Price-related opinion surveys(seasonally adjusted)         (percentage balances)   (diffusion indices)            Selling price expectationsConsumer   Input prices
   Prices charged   (for next three months)price trends      over pastManu-Retail tradeServicesConstruction12 monthsManu-ServicesManu-Services
facturingfacturingfacturing123456789
1999-134.8- - -1.8
34.057.756.7
- 49.920122.78.12.1
-12.738.652.755.149.947.9
2013-0.31.7-1.2
-17.129.848.553.849.447.8
2014-0.8-1.41.2
-17.614.349.653.549.748.2
2014 Q4 -2.1-4.42.8
-15.77.948.752.649.047.1
2015 Q1 -5.5-0.71.4
-17.0-2.445.852.548.847.6
         Q2 -1.13.33.0
-15.4-0.854.754.450.449.0
         Q3 -1.81.12.4
-13.1-0.149.553.649.949.9
2015 Apr. -2.72.82.3
-17.7-2.052.453.650.148.9
         May -0.62.42.6
-13.7-0.656.055.450.049.3
         June 0.04.74.2
-14.90.155.754.151.048.9
         July -0.10.82.1
-14.00.954.454.350.449.5
         Aug. -2.03.02.2
-13.00.349.653.150.549.9
         Sep. -3.3-0.62.9
-12.2-1.444.653.548.750.4
Sources: European Commission (Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs) and Markit.4.5 Labour cost indices(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)      TotalTotal   By component
   For selected economic activitiesMemo item:
(index:Indicator of
salariescontributions
economywages
 1)1234567
% of total100.0100.074.625.469.330.7 in 2012       
2012100.02.12.12.12.41.32.22013101.31.31.41.21.21.71.82014102.61.41.31.31.31.41.72014 Q3 100.51.51.51.61.41.91.7         Q4 108.01.31.11.51.11.51.72015 Q1 97.51.92.01.41.91.91.4         Q2 108.01.61.90.41.61.41.5Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Experimental data based on non-harmonised sources (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/intro/html/experiment.en.html for further details).S 174 Prices and costsS 17ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics4.6 Unit labour costs, compensation per labour input and labour productivity(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated; quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Unit labour costs TotalTotal
   By economic activity(index:2010Agriculture,Manu-Con-Trade,InformationFinanceRealProfessional,Public ad-Arts, enter-
=100)forestryfacturing,structiontransport,and commu-andestatebusiness andministration,tainment
and fishingenergy and
accom-nicationinsurance
supporteducation,and other
utilitiesmodation andserviceshealth andservices
food servicessocial work12
345
6789
1011122012102.51.93.22.14.1
1.30.30.91.4
3.60.72.9
2013103.71.2-0.91.70.3
1.2-0.52.1-2.2
1.21.61.6
2014105.01.2-3.71.60.7
0.81.21.20.8
2.51.31.2
2014 Q3 105.21.3-5.01.61.4
1.21.01.41.2
2.81.31.2
         Q4 105.31.3-0.82.31.1
0.61.41.21.2
2.31.41.4
2015 Q1 105.50.90.31.21.6
0.5-0.30.13.1
2.11.30.5
         Q2 105.60.81.20.81.5
0.01.0-0.12.3
1.51.20.9
Compensation per employee 2012103.61.50.11.92.4
1.71.61.01.1
2.10.81.8
2013105.31.63.92.71.5
0.90.71.9-0.1
1.01.81.1
2014106.81.4-1.22.21.6
1.32.32.01.4
1.91.21.0
2014 Q3 107.11.3-1.01.90.6
1.22.01.91.8
2.11.10.8
         Q4 107.51.3-1.32.11.2
1.12.62.41.2
1.71.30.1
2015 Q1 108.11.40.91.80.6
1.12.11.42.9
2.01.40.6
         Q2 108.21.41.31.90.7
1.42.81.21.3
1.71.40.7
Labour productivity per person employed2012101.1-0.4-3.0-0.2-1.7
0.41.30.1-0.3-1.5
0.1-1.1
2013101.50.44.81.01.2
-0.41.2-0.12.1-0.2
0.3-0.5
2014101.80.32.60.60.9
0.51.10.70.5-0.5
-0.1-0.2
2014 Q3 101.80.04.20.4-0.8
0.01.00.50.7-0.7
-0.2-0.4
         Q4 102.10.1-0.6-0.20.1
0.51.31.20.0-0.6
-0.1-1.3
2015 Q1 102.40.40.60.6-0.9
0.62.31.3-0.2-0.2
0.10.1
         Q2 102.50.70.11.2-0.8
1.41.81.3-1.0
0.20.3-0.1
Compensation per hour worked 2012104.82.92.13.65.3
3.52.01.51.7
3.21.32.7
2013107.22.23.92.92.9
1.61.12.51.1
2.02.22.1
2014108.61.4-0.51.81.4
1.32.02.21.6
1.81.01.4
2014 Q3 108.81.4-0.41.80.7
1.31.71.91.7
1.71.21.5
         Q4 109.01.2-1.21.50.9
1.01.72.81.3
1.51.10.7
2015 Q1 109.81.40.51.70.5
1.41.11.92.9
2.11.60.2
         Q2 109.91.30.61.6-0.1
1.51.81.40.3
1.31.40.9
Hourly labour productivity2012102.41.0-2.01.41.1
1.91.80.80.8-0.3
0.6-0.1
2013103.41.05.11.22.5
0.21.70.33.1
0.60.70.6
2014103.70.33.00.10.7
0.61.01.11.2-0.4
-0.30.3
2014 Q3 103.70.24.60.3-0.2
0.21.10.71.7-0.6
-0.10.3
         Q4 103.7-0.1-1.4-0.9-0.4
0.60.61.70.2-0.8
-0.3-0.7
2015 Q1 104.20.5-0.70.4-0.7
1.12.11.7-0.7
0.20.3-0.1
         Q2 104.30.6-0.70.7-1.4
1.71.21.4-1.6-0.1
0.20.0
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.S 185 Money and creditS 18ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics5.1 Monetary aggregates 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts   M3         M2   M3-M2            M1   M2-M1   CurrencyOvernight
DepositsDeposits
ReposMoneyDebt
indeposits
with anredeemable
marketsecurities
circulationagreedat notice
fundwith
maturityof up to
sharesa maturity
of up to3 months
of up to2 years2 years123456789101112
2012863.44,244.05,107.51,803.32,081.53,884.88,992.3125.0483.1180.6788.79,781.0
2013908.84,482.65,391.41,691.22,123.23,814.49,205.8120.0417.886.5624.39,830.0
2014967.34,949.15,916.41,605.02,129.63,734.59,650.9122.2427.3104.4653.910,304.8
2014 Q3 948.24,745.25,693.41,647.52,136.63,784.19,477.5122.4419.068.8610.210,087.7
         Q4 967.34,949.15,916.41,605.02,129.63,734.59,650.9122.2427.3104.4653.910,304.8
2015 Q1 993.75,173.76,167.41,529.22,133.53,662.79,830.1125.7436.596.9659.110,489.2
         Q2 1,015.05,303.26,318.21,478.82,162.13,640.99,959.091.1438.097.1626.110,585.2
2015 Mar. 993.75,173.76,167.41,529.22,133.53,662.79,830.1125.7436.596.9659.110,489.2
         Apr. 1,003.35,189.96,193.21,518.92,151.13,670.09,863.2129.5451.7103.5684.710,547.9
         May 1,006.75,264.96,271.61,486.12,157.23,643.39,914.9111.7442.992.7647.310,562.2
         June 1,015.05,303.26,318.21,478.82,162.13,640.99,959.091.1438.097.1626.110,585.2
         July 1,021.15,380.96,402.01,469.82,162.93,632.710,034.7105.6456.285.3647.110,681.8
         Aug. (p)1,025.65,381.46,407.11,460.72,167.13,627.810,034.8102.4439.782.2624.210,659.0
Transactions201220.0289.5309.5-36.0114.978.9388.5-16.9-20.2-18.5-55.6332.8
201345.3245.8291.1-111.143.9-67.2223.9-12.0-48.8-62.8-123.6100.3
201458.0370.2428.1-91.93.6-88.3339.80.810.712.524.0363.7
2014 Q3 16.7109.1125.7-27.15.1-22.0103.8-8.110.03.45.3109.1
         Q4 19.1125.9145.1-40.9-9.0-50.095.1-0.511.218.429.1124.2
2015 Q1 25.2188.7213.9-63.34.8-58.5155.42.34.9-8.7-1.6153.9
         Q2 21.3151.6172.8-49.115.0-34.1138.7-34.31.51.9-30.9107.9
2015 Mar. 1.359.861.1-8.910.41.562.6-7.0-6.6-13.2-26.835.8
         Apr. 9.637.747.4-8.54.0-4.542.84.115.37.526.969.7
         May 3.470.974.3-34.16.0-28.146.2-18.0-8.8-11.1-37.98.3
         June 8.243.051.2-6.55.0-1.549.7-20.4-4.95.4-19.929.8
         July 6.173.779.8-14.10.9-13.266.614.318.3-11.521.087.6
         Aug. (p)4.56.010.5-7.54.2-3.27.3-2.9-4.4-3.9-11.1-3.9
Growth rates20122.47.36.4-1.95.92.14.5-11.6-3.9-9.9-6.63.5
20135.25.85.7-6.22.1-1.72.5-9.5-10.4-37.8-16.21.0
20146.48.27.9-5.40.2-2.33.70.72.618.33.93.7
2014 Q3 6.06.26.2-3.90.3-1.53.09.7-1.1-26.8-4.12.5
         Q4 6.48.27.9-5.40.2-2.33.70.72.618.33.93.7
2015 Q1 7.310.510.0-7.70.3-3.24.65.15.311.05.54.7
         Q2 8.812.311.7-10.80.7-4.35.2-30.96.825.20.54.9
2015 Mar. 7.310.510.0-7.70.3-3.24.65.15.311.05.54.7
         Apr. 8.211.010.5-8.00.5-3.34.96.29.240.011.65.3
         May 8.311.811.2-10.30.7-4.15.0-9.57.715.14.75.0
         June 8.812.311.7-10.80.7-4.35.2-30.96.825.20.54.9
         July 8.912.812.2-11.50.8-4.65.4-19.27.918.52.75.3
         Aug. (p)8.611.911.4-11.30.8-4.55.1-21.38.06.41.14.8
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.S 195 Money and creditS 19ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics5.2 Deposits in M3 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts          Non-financial corporations 2)    Households 3) FinancialInsuranceOther
corpor-corpor-general
TotalOvernightWith anRedeem-ReposTotalOvernightWith anRedeem-Reposationsationsgovern-
agreedable
agreedable
other thanandment
 4)maturityat notice
maturityat notice
MFIs andpension
of up toof up to
of up toof up to
ICPFs 2)funds2 years3 months
2 years3 months
12345678910111213
20121,618.71,112.8406.988.110.85,308.62,360.4977.31,960.310.5811.2209.1306.3
20131,710.61,198.6400.894.716.55,414.02,542.6875.71,991.24.5801.0192.8298.6
20141,813.61,329.4368.396.519.55,556.92,753.4810.71,989.92.8885.5218.9330.8
2014 Q3 1,789.51,283.8391.199.215.45,531.92,686.9845.11,995.14.9794.8208.4327.1
         Q4 1,813.61,329.4368.396.519.55,556.92,753.4810.71,989.92.8885.5218.9330.8
2015 Q1 1,847.01,392.6340.499.014.95,598.32,843.8761.71,988.83.9952.8225.0339.0
         Q2 1,852.01,407.2320.7111.912.25,649.42,911.5734.72,000.32.8965.6228.6339.6
2015 Mar. 1,847.01,392.6340.499.014.95,598.32,843.8761.71,988.83.9952.8225.0339.0
         Apr. 1,844.51,387.5333.3112.810.95,611.52,859.2756.71,991.93.7959.3229.8344.3
         May 1,852.01,403.6324.3111.912.25,624.42,878.1745.81,996.73.8966.4230.7346.4
         June 1,852.01,407.2320.7111.912.25,649.42,911.5734.72,000.32.8965.6228.6339.6
         July 1,889.61,440.5323.3113.012.75,667.42,945.3721.21,997.73.2981.1233.7347.4
         Aug. (p)1,888.91,441.5325.7113.78.15,674.72,957.6714.41,999.53.1969.1225.3353.7
Transactions201272.299.4-33.210.0-4.0222.899.435.6100.2-12.516.515.025.0
201397.990.4-6.07.75.8108.7183.7-100.131.1-6.0-17.4-14.2-8.5
201468.690.2-25.41.42.5140.4209.1-65.6-1.4-1.746.46.320.9
2014 Q3 29.633.6-5.71.9-0.247.361.9-16.01.00.4-8.3-2.312.6
         Q4 7.116.3-12.1-1.24.026.067.7-33.0-6.6-2.056.4-8.2-5.7
2015 Q1 29.649.1-17.22.5-4.939.181.4-43.3-0.11.150.54.68.6
         Q2 8.829.4-19.01.0-2.652.971.6-27.29.6-1.116.93.90.7
2015 Mar. -9.0-3.9-8.02.00.930.732.8-9.98.2-0.443.00.3-10.7
         Apr. 1.610.0-6.31.9-3.914.918.9-5.01.3-0.310.25.15.4
         May 5.214.4-9.5-0.91.212.018.3-11.24.70.24.80.72.0
         June 2.05.0-3.20.00.125.934.4-11.13.6-1.11.8-1.9-6.7
         July 33.631.60.41.10.517.133.1-13.9-2.60.413.34.86.0
         Aug. (p)2.33.13.00.7-4.68.413.1-6.51.9-0.1-8.9-8.26.3
Growth rates20124.79.8-7.513.2-25.24.44.43.85.4-54.22.17.89.1
20136.18.1-1.58.854.62.07.8-10.31.6-57.0-2.2-6.9-2.8
20144.07.5-6.31.514.52.68.2-7.5-0.1-37.25.53.47.0
2014 Q3 6.08.6-2.13.447.42.27.3-7.00.1-20.8-0.92.33.3
         Q4 4.07.5-6.31.514.52.68.2-7.5-0.1-37.25.53.47.0
2015 Q1 4.69.5-10.03.6-5.72.89.7-11.20.1-31.014.6-0.85.2
         Q2 4.210.1-14.14.5-23.33.010.8-13.90.2-38.013.7-1.35.1
2015 Mar. 4.69.5-10.03.6-5.72.89.7-11.20.1-31.014.6-0.85.2
         Apr. 4.49.9-11.45.5-37.82.910.0-11.40.1-35.315.61.57.5
         May 4.410.4-13.94.5-24.12.910.2-12.70.2-25.313.41.88.5
         June 4.210.1-14.14.5-23.33.010.8-13.90.2-38.013.7-1.35.1
         July 5.511.7-14.24.6-11.33.111.2-15.10.1-35.414.5-1.65.7
         Aug. (p)4.810.8-13.04.9-49.12.910.8-15.30.2-36.914.1-5.55.7
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).3) Including non-profit institutions serving households.
4) Refers to the general government sector excluding central government.S 205 Money and creditS 20ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics5.3 Credit to euro area residents 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts         Credit to general government   Credit to other euro area residentsTotalLoansDebtTotal
   LoansDebtEquity and
securities   securitiesnon-money
   TotalTo non-To house-To financialTo insurance
market fundfinancialholds
 4)corporationscorporations
investmentAdjusted forcorpor-
other thanand pension
fund sharesloan salesations
 3)MFIs andfunds
and securi-ICPFs 3)tisation 2)12345
678
91011
1220123,410.81,169.32,241.513,069.510,860.011,265.44,544.65,242.3984.389.01,435.9773.6
20133,407.51,096.32,311.212,709.410,546.410,932.04,354.15,221.4872.698.31,363.9799.1
20143,609.71,131.72,478.012,562.610,512.210,921.54,280.35,199.3904.6128.11,276.5773.8
2014 Q3 3,508.91,102.22,406.712,561.810,444.810,861.44,288.15,194.6858.8103.31,307.0810.1
         Q4 3,609.71,131.72,478.012,562.610,512.210,921.54,280.35,199.3904.6128.11,276.5773.8
2015 Q1 3,672.11,153.42,518.712,676.310,613.911,007.54,310.15,233.7935.5134.61,275.1787.3
         Q2 3,676.41,137.62,538.812,632.310,590.410,984.14,291.85,257.2905.0136.51,251.5790.3
2015 Mar. 3,672.11,153.42,518.712,676.310,613.911,007.54,310.15,233.7935.5134.61,275.1787.3
         Apr. 3,698.31,151.62,546.712,658.110,610.411,003.54,303.95,236.3933.1137.11,266.0781.7
         May 3,692.21,144.02,548.212,665.610,611.211,005.44,300.45,243.4923.2144.21,263.3791.0
         June 3,676.41,137.62,538.812,632.310,590.410,984.14,291.85,257.2905.0136.51,251.5790.3
         July 3,726.01,131.52,594.512,716.210,610.011,009.94,300.45,261.3916.8131.51,299.7806.5
         Aug. (p)3,765.01,131.92,633.012,710.910,604.911,006.44,294.05,267.2915.1128.61,310.4795.5
Transactions2012185.0-4.0189.0-100.6-69.1-53.0-107.626.014.5-2.0-69.938.5
2013-24.4-73.649.2-304.5-247.4-267.5-132.8-3.5-120.79.6-71.714.6
201473.616.357.3-106.5-50.7-32.0-58.3-15.011.011.6-90.034.2
2014 Q3 40.4-1.441.8-18.7-10.3-17.4-18.48.2-4.44.2-14.15.7
         Q4 47.512.834.72.022.814.34.35.16.86.6-36.715.9
2015 Q1 36.521.515.036.545.827.48.320.111.56.0-2.1-7.2
         Q2 53.4-15.468.8-7.34.01.01.229.7-28.92.0-18.47.1
2015 Mar. 25.35.419.916.021.510.8-3.012.914.2-2.60.9-6.4
         Apr. 37.2-1.538.70.112.513.42.27.10.62.7-6.8-5.6
         May 6.8-7.814.63.3-1.71.4-4.86.9-10.97.0-2.87.8
         June 9.5-6.015.5-10.7-6.8-13.83.815.7-18.7-7.7-8.84.9
         July 31.1-5.036.179.121.329.88.95.312.1-5.046.910.9
         Aug. (p)48.10.447.721.36.98.8-0.69.01.3-2.914.7-0.3
Growth rates20125.8-0.39.5-0.8-0.6-0.5-2.30.51.5-2.2-4.65.2
2013-0.7-6.32.2-2.3-2.3-2.4-2.9-0.1-12.210.8-5.01.9
20142.11.52.4-0.8-0.5-0.3-1.3-0.31.111.8-6.64.3
2014 Q3 -0.5-0.7-0.4-1.9-1.2-1.0-2.0-0.5-2.58.5-8.51.8
         Q4 2.11.52.4-0.8-0.5-0.3-1.3-0.31.111.8-6.64.3
2015 Q1 2.82.03.1-0.20.10.2-0.60.02.314.1-4.92.9
         Q2 5.11.66.70.10.60.2-0.11.2-1.917.8-5.42.6
2015 Mar. 2.82.03.1-0.20.10.2-0.60.02.314.1-4.92.9
         Apr. 3.82.44.50.00.10.2-0.40.00.317.2-2.22.7
         May 3.90.95.30.20.60.3-0.21.0-0.927.0-4.93.7
         June 5.11.66.70.10.60.2-0.11.2-1.917.8-5.42.6
         July 5.50.87.70.70.90.70.41.30.410.1-2.13.0
         Aug. (p)6.31.08.71.01.00.80.41.40.312.5-0.43.0
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Adjusted for the derecognition of loans on the MFI balance sheet on account of their sale or securitisation.
3) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).4) Including non-profit institutions serving households.S 215 Money and creditS 21ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics5.4 MFI loans to euro area non-financial corporations and households 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts         Non-financial corporations 2)    Households 3)         TotalUp to 1 yearOver 1Over 5 years   Total
Loans forLoans forOther loans
and up toconsumptionhouse
Adjusted for5 yearsAdjusted forpurchaseloan salesloan salesand securi-and securi-tisation 4)tisation 4)1234567891
020124,544.64,606.11,127.9795.62,621.05,242.35,578.5602.03,823.6816.7
20134,354.14,408.81,065.6740.82,547.85,221.45,545.7573.53,851.5796.4
20144,280.34,337.61,081.2725.12,474.05,199.35,544.6563.33,860.1776.0
2014 Q3 4,288.14,346.81,056.5726.12,505.45,194.65,544.8567.13,843.7783.8
         Q4 4,280.34,337.61,081.2725.12,474.05,199.35,544.6563.33,860.1776.0
2015 Q1 4,310.14,365.71,089.9738.92,481.35,233.75,569.6567.93,890.4775.4
         Q2 4,291.84,348.11,084.5744.42,462.95,257.25,589.6578.53,907.6771.1
2015 Mar. 4,310.14,365.71,089.9738.92,481.35,233.75,569.6567.93,890.4775.4
         Apr. 4,303.94,358.81,090.4738.02,475.55,236.35,573.8566.93,894.8774.6
         May 4,300.44,356.51,085.2742.72,472.55,243.45,577.6568.33,901.7773.4
         June 4,291.84,348.11,084.5744.42,462.95,257.25,589.6578.53,907.6771.1
         July 4,300.44,358.51,085.8744.82,469.85,261.35,597.8579.53,911.7770.0
         Aug. (p)4,294.04,353.71,086.2743.32,464.55,267.25,602.6581.63,915.8769.7
Transactions2012-107.6-74.16.2-51.4-62.326.08.6-17.748.8-5.1
2013-132.8-145.1-44.5-44.5-43.7-3.5-13.7-18.127.6-13.1
2014-58.3-61.9-13.6
1.6-46.2-15.06.8-3.0-3.1-8.9
2014 Q3 -18.4-20.6-3.1-6.8-8.48.20.7
1.210.4-3.3
         Q4 4.30.4-7.3
8.53.05.12.2-2.29.3-2.1
2015 Q1 8.33.6-0.7
7.31.820.111.1
2.217.9-0.1
         Q2 1.22.8-0.111.5-10.229.722.7
9.121.7-1.1
2015 Mar. -3.0-2.1-1.8
3.7-4.912.95.6
2.97.52.4
         Apr. 2.21.83.7
0.7-2.27.19.6-0.77.50.3
         May -4.8-1.8-6.2
4.3-2.86.93.7
1.76.4-1.1
         June 3.82.82.5
6.5-5.215.79.4
8.27.8-0.3
         July 8.912.51.0
0.57.55.39.5
1.64.4-0.7
         Aug. (p)-0.61.22.9-0.5-3.09.07.9
2.45.90.7
Growth rates2012-2.3-1.60.5-6.0-2.30.50.2-2.81.3-0.6
2013-2.9-3.2-4.0-5.6-1.7-0.1-0.2-3.00.7-1.6
2014-1.3-1.4-1.3
0.2-1.8-0.30.1-0.5-0.1-1.1
2014 Q3 -2.0-2.2-1.4-3.3-1.9-0.50.0-1.1-0.2-1.7
         Q4 -1.3-1.4-1.3
0.2-1.8-0.30.1-0.5-0.1-1.1
2015 Q1 -0.6-0.6-0.7
2.1-1.20.00.3-0.10.1-0.7
         Q2 -0.1-0.3-1.1
2.8-0.61.20.7
1.81.5-0.8
2015 Mar. -0.6-0.6-0.7
2.1-1.20.00.3-0.10.1-0.7
         Apr. -0.4-0.50.4
1.4-1.20.00.5-0.10.2-0.7
         May -0.2-0.30.4
2.4-1.21.00.5
0.51.4-0.7
         June -0.1-0.3-1.1
2.8-0.61.20.7
1.81.5-0.8
         July 0.40.3-0.3
3.2-0.21.30.9
2.01.6-0.7
         Aug. (p)0.40.40.2
3.2-0.31.41.0
2.61.6-0.5
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).3) Including non-profit institutions serving households.
4) Adjusted for the derecognition of loans on the MFI balance sheet on account of their sale or securitisation.S 225 Money and creditS 22ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics5.5 Counterparts to M3 other than credit to euro area residents 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts         MFI liabilities   MFI assets      Central   Longer-term financial liabilities vis-à-vis other euro area residentsNet external
   Othergovernmentassets   holdings 2)TotalDepositsDepositsDebtCapital
   Totalwith anredeemablesecuritiesand reserves
agreedat noticewith a
ReposReverse
maturityof overmaturity
with centralrepos to
of over3 monthsof over
counter-central
2 years2 yearsparties 3)counter-parties 3)1234567891
02012305.47,578.12,395.9106.02,680.82,395.41,029.8154.4260.8201.2
2013260.27,311.02,373.391.52,506.32,340.01,153.9130.6183.8122.1
2014262.07,175.52,253.592.22,375.12,454.61,388.8181.2185.3139.8
2014 Q3 249.77,336.12,278.692.42,457.02,507.91,419.3183.5163.6121.7
         Q4 262.07,175.52,253.592.22,375.12,454.61,388.8181.2185.3139.8
2015 Q1 287.67,313.42,259.890.52,394.82,568.21,511.5230.3234.8159.1
         Q2 265.17,154.32,219.986.52,331.52,516.41,457.7238.2224.6143.7
2015 Mar. 287.67,313.42,259.890.52,394.82,568.21,511.5230.3234.8159.1
         Apr. 260.37,227.02,238.288.72,355.32,544.81,450.6228.2209.3132.1
         May 275.97,219.32,232.787.42,343.22,556.01,467.0232.5222.9140.7
         June 265.17,154.32,219.986.52,331.52,516.41,457.7238.2224.6143.7
         July 248.27,148.72,229.085.82,316.22,517.81,387.4249.2202.4137.4
         Aug. (p)273.87,121.72,224.484.12,295.22,518.01,345.7233.0207.0128.4
Transactions2012-4.9-112.8-156.3-10.2-106.4160.199.531.39.441.5
2013-46.0-90.8-18.6-14.3-137.679.7359.2-66.632.243.9
2014-6.9-162.4-120.12.1-154.9110.6246.0-18.51.517.7
2014 Q3 -20.9-1.8-28.42.3-28.552.738.426.4-7.72.6
         Q4 4.5-94.1-25.51.2-77.47.537.8-52.721.718.1
2015 Q1 22.4-51.4-31.1-2.8-47.229.73.648.149.419.3
         Q2 -22.5-81.7-39.3-4.0-48.39.9-7.5-35.0-10.2-15.4
2015 Mar. 24.6-15.2-6.0-1.3-22.714.728.7-24.98.414.6
         Apr. -27.3-38.3-19.2-1.8-18.91.6-30.3-2.9-25.4-27.0
         May 15.6-18.1-6.9-1.3-23.914.04.3-8.413.68.6
         June -10.8-25.4-13.2-0.9-5.5-5.718.6-23.71.63.1
         July -17.0-4.912.7-0.7-21.34.3-59.715.3-22.2-6.4
         Aug. (p)25.65.7-2.9-1.6-7.617.8-20.1-21.94.6-9.0
Growth rates2012-1.5-1.5-6.1-8.8-3.87.1
- - 2.526.1
2013-15.1-1.2-0.8-13.5-5.13.4
- - 10.323.5
2014-2.7-2.2-5.12.3-6.14.6
- - 0.814.5
2014 Q3 -11.5-1.1-4.7-1.2-2.74.2
- - -17.5-3.2
         Q4 -2.7-2.2-5.12.3-6.14.6
- - 0.814.5
2015 Q1 5.7-2.9-5.9-0.3-6.83.9
- - 32.536.3
         Q2 -6.0-3.1-5.4-3.7-8.14.1
- - 31.020.7
2015 Mar. 5.7-2.9-5.9-0.3-6.83.9
- - 32.536.3
         Apr. -5.6-3.1-5.5-2.3-7.33.3
- - 28.633.0
         May -2.5-3.2-5.3-3.8-8.44.1
- - 51.451.4
         June -6.0-3.1-5.4-3.7-8.14.1
- - 31.020.7
         July -12.7-3.1-4.4-5.1-8.53.5
- - 19.213.6
         Aug. (p)-1.5-3.1-4.3-8.1-8.63.8
- - 20.39.8
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Comprises central government holdings of deposits with the MFI sector and of securities issued by the MFI sector.
3) Not adjusted for seasonal effects.S 236 Fiscal developmentsS 23ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics6.1 Deficit/surplus(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)   Deficit (-)/surplus (+)Memo item:PrimaryTotalCentralStateLocalSocualdeficit (-)/governmentgovernmentgovernment
securitysurplus (+)funds123456
2011-4.2-3.3-0.7-0.20.0-1.22012-3.7-3.4-0.30.00.0-0.62013-3.0-2.6-0.20.0-0.1-0.22014-2.6-2.2-0.20.0-0.10.12014 Q2 -2.6. . . . 0.1
         Q3 -2.4. . . . 0.3
         Q4 -2.4. . . . 0.2
2015 Q1 -2.4. . . . 0.2
Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.6.2 Revenue and expenditure(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)         Revenue   Expenditure      Total   Current revenueCapitalTotal
   Current expenditureCapitalrevenueexpenditureDirectIndirectNet social
Compen-IntermediateInterestSocial
taxestaxescontributions
sation ofconsumption
benefitsemployees1234
56789
1011
1213201144.944.511.612.615.10.449.144.810.4
5.33.022.2
4.3201246.045.612.212.915.30.449.745.210.4
5.43.022.6
4.5201346.646.112.512.915.50.549.645.510.4
5.42.822.9
4.1201446.846.312.513.115.50.549.445.410.3
5.32.723.1
3.92014 Q2 46.746.212.513.015.50.549.345.410.3
5.32.723.0
3.9         Q3 46.646.212.513.115.50.549.145.310.3
5.32.723.0
3.7         Q4 46.746.212.513.115.50.549.145.410.3
5.32.623.1
3.72015 Q1 46.646.212.513.115.50.549.045.310.3
5.32.523.1
3.7Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.6.3 Government debt-to-GDP ratio(as a percentage of GDP; outstanding amounts at end of period)               Total   Financial instrument
   Holder   Original maturity   Residual maturity
   CurrencyCurrencyLoansDebt   Resident creditorsNon-residentUp toOverUp toOver 1OverEuro orOther
andsecurities
creditors1 year1 year1 yearand up to5 yearsparticipatingcurren-
depositsMFIs5 yearscurrenciescies
123456
789101112
1314
201185.92.915.567.542.824.443.112.273.820.429.935.684.21.8
201289.33.017.468.945.526.243.811.477.919.731.737.987.12.2
201391.12.717.271.246.026.145.110.480.619.432.239.489.12.0
201492.12.717.072.445.325.946.810.182.019.032.141.090.12.0
2014 Q2 92.72.716.773.4. . . . . . . . . . 
         Q3 92.12.616.772.8. . . . . . . . . . 
         Q4 92.02.716.972.4. . . . . . . . . . 
2015 Q1 92.92.716.773.5. . . . . . . . . . 
Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.S 246 Fiscal developmentsS 24ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics6.4 Annual change in the government debt-to-GDP ratio and underlying factors 1)(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)Change inPrimary
   Deficit-debt adjustmentInterest-Memo item:
debt-to-deficit (+)/
   growthBorrowing
GDP ratio 2)surplus (-)Total   Transactions in main financial assetsRevaluationOtherdifferentialrequirement
effectsTotalCurrencyLoansDebtEquity andand other
andsecuritiesinvestmentchanges in
depositsfund sharesvolume
123456
78910
111220112.11.20.1-0.40.2-0.2-0.2-0.10.40.2
0.83.920123.40.60.01.00.30.3-0.10.5-1.30.3
2.75.020131.80.2-0.3-0.6-0.5-0.4-0.10.3-0.10.4
1.92.720141.0-0.10.0-0.10.3-0.2-0.30.00.00.1
1.12.62014 Q2 0.9-0.1-0.2-0.10.00.0-0.20.1-0.20.1
1.32.6         Q3 1.0-0.30.00.00.00.0-0.20.2-0.30.3
1.22.7         Q4 1.1-0.20.20.20.20.0-0.20.1-0.10.1
1.12.72015 Q1 0.9-0.20.10.20.4-0.1-0.20.1-0.20.1
1.02.7Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.1) Intergovernmental lending in the context of the financial crisis is consolidated except in quarterly data on the deficit-debt adjustment.2) Calculated as the difference between the government debt-to-GDP ratios at the end of the reference period and a year earlier.6.5 Government debt securities 1)(debt service as a percentage of GDP; flows during debt service period; average nominal yields in percentages per annum)   Debt service due within 1 year 2) Average   Average nominal yields 4)      residual      Total   Principal
   Interestmaturity   Outstanding amounts   Transactionsin years 3)MaturitiesMaturitiesTotalFloatingZero   Fixed rateIssuanceRedemption
of up to 3of up to 3ratecoupon
monthsmonthsMaturitiesof up to 1year12
34
5678910111213
201216.214.14.92.10.5
6.33.81.71.14.03.11.62.2
201316.514.45.02.10.5
6.33.51.71.33.72.81.21.8
201415.913.95.12.00.5
6.43.11.50.53.52.70.81.6
2014 Q2 16.514.45.42.10.5
6.43.31.60.73.62.71.11.6
         Q3 17.315.25.72.10.5
6.43.21.50.53.52.80.91.6
         Q4 15.913.95.12.00.5
6.43.11.50.53.52.70.81.6
2015 Q1 15.413.44.62.00.5
6.53.11.30.33.52.90.61.7
2015 Apr. 15.913.94.82.00.5
6.63.11.30.23.42.90.61.7
         May 15.913.95.02.00.5
6.63.01.30.23.42.90.51.6
         June 15.413.44.92.00.5
6.63.01.30.23.42.90.51.5
         July 15.313.34.32.00.5
6.62.91.30.13.42.90.41.6
         Aug. 15.313.34.42.00.5
6.62.91.20.13.42.90.41.5
         Sep. 15.713.74.62.00.5
6.62.91.20.13.32.90.41.4
Source: ECB.
1) At face value and not consolidated within the general government sector.
2) Excludes future payments on debt securities not yet outstanding and early redemptions.
3) Residual maturity at the end of the period.
4) Outstanding amounts at the end of the period; transactions as 12-month average.S 256 Fiscal developmentsS 25ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 7 / 2015 - Statistics6.6 Fiscal developments in euro area countries(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period and outstanding amounts at end of period)Government deficit (-)/surplus (+)BelgiumGermanyEstoniaIrelandGreeceSpainFrance
ItalyCyprus
123456789
2011-4.1-1.01.2-12.5-10.2
-9.5-5.1-3.5-5.7
2012-4.1-0.1-0.3-8.0-8.8-10.4
-4.8-3.0-5.8
2013-2.9-0.1-0.1-5.7-12.4
-6.9-4.1-2.9-4.9
2014-3.10.30.7-3.9-3.6-5.9-3.9-3.0-8.9
2014 Q2 -3.30.3-0.3-5.1-3.0-6.2-3.9-2.9-11.9
         Q3 -3.10.5-0.2-4.6-2.3-5.7-4.0-2.8-10.2
         Q4 -3.20.60.6-4.0-3.5-5.8-4.0-3.0-8.8
2015 Q1 -3.50.70.4-3.9-4.6-5.8-3.9-2.9-0.2
Government debt2011102.278.45.9109.3172.0
69.585.2116.465.8
2012104.179.79.5120.2159.4
85.489.6123.279.3
2013105.177.49.9120.0177.0
93.792.3128.8102.5
2014106.774.910.4107.5178.6
99.395.6132.3108.2
2014 Q2 108.975.810.5114.5177.4
96.495.5134.1109.8
         Q3 108.375.310.5112.6175.8
96.895.7132.0104.7
         Q4 106.674.910.6107.6177.1
97.795.6132.1107.5
2015 Q1 111.174.410.5104.8168.8
98.097.5135.1106.8
Government deficit (-)/surplus (+)LatviaLithuaniaLuxembourgMaltaNetherlandsAustriaPortugalSloveniaSlovakiaFinland
10111213141516171819
2011-3.4-8.9
0.5-2.6-4.3-2.6-7.4-6.6-4.1-1.0
2012-0.8-3.1
0.2-3.6-3.9-2.2-5.7-4.1-4.2-2.1
2013-0.9-2.6
0.7-2.6-2.4-1.3-4.8-15.0-2.6-2.5
2014-1.5-0.7
1.4-2.1-2.4-2.7-7.2-5.0-2.8-3.3
2014 Q2 -0.3-1.3
1.3-3.4-3.0-1.2-4.6-12.8-2.6-2.7
         Q3 0.0-0.7
0.7-2.8-2.8-0.4-4.4-12.8-2.8-2.8
         Q4 -1.4-0.7
0.6-2.1-2.4-2.4-4.5-4.9-2.9-3.1
2015 Q1 -1.9-0.8
0.3-2.5-2.0-1.9-4.4-4.6-2.8-3.0
Government debt201142.837.219.269.861.782.2111.446.443.348.5
201241.439.822.167.666.481.6126.253.751.952.9
201339.138.823.469.667.980.8129.070.854.655.6
201440.640.723.068.368.284.2130.280.853.559.3
2014 Q2 41.038.622.474.868.682.2130.878.255.758.5
         Q3 40.438.122.172.268.080.7132.277.755.457.8
         Q4 40.040.822.168.567.984.4130.280.953.659.3
2015 Q1 35.038.121.670.368.984.7129.681.954.060.3
Source: Eurostat.© European Central BankPostal address 60640 Frankfurt am Main, GermanyTelephone
 +49 69 1344 0Website
 www.ecb.europa.eu
This Bulletin was produced under the responsibility of the Executive Board of the ECB. Translations are prepared and published by 
the national central banks.All rights reserved. Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. The cut-off date for the statistics included in this issue was 21 October 2015.

ISSN 2363-3417 (epub)ISSN 2363-3417 (online)EU catalogue No QB-BP-15-007-EN-E (epub)EU catalogue No QB-BP-15-007-EN-N (online)