COMMITTEE OF 
GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE 
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY 
ANNUAL REPORT (July 1990 - December 1991) ISBN 92-9166-201-1 (PRINT), 92-9166-202-X (ONLINE)MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
A. Verplaetse APRIL 1992 Nationale Bank 
van BelgiGlBanque Nationale de Belgique 
E. Hoffmeyer Danmarks Nationalbank H. Schlesinger* Deutsche Bundesbank 
E. Christodoulou** Bank of Greece M. Rubio Banco de 
Espafia J. de Larosi5re Banque de France 
M. Doyle C. Ciampi Central Bank of Ireland Banca d'Italia P. Jaans Institut Monetaire Luxembourgeois W. Duisenberg Nederlandsche Bank J. Tavares Moreira 
R. Leigh-Pemberton Banco de Portugal 
Bank of England A member of the Commission of the 
European Communities 
is invited, as a representative, to the 
meetings of the Committee of Governors. * Replaced K.O. Pbhl with effect from 1st August 1991. 
** Replaced D. Chalikias with effect from 18th February 
1992. TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Pane INTRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT ..................... 1 PART A 
MONETARY ISSVES AhlD THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
. I . ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE OF 
GOVERNORS .......... 1 . Co-ordination of monetary policies 
........... 2 . Monitoring EMS developments .............. 3 . Work related to the move to the final stage of EMU ... 4 . Issues in the 
field of Banking Supervision and payment systems ........................ 5 . Relationships with central banks outside the Community . 6 . Co-operation with 
other Community bodies ........ I1 . ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
AND MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION . . 1 . The economic background to monetary policy 
....... 2 . Monetary and exchange rate developments ........ 3 . Prospects and monetary policy issues .......... I11 . THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES 
OF THE NEW MONETARY INSTITUTIONS 
IN STAGES TWO AND THREE OF ECONOMIC 
AND MONETARY UNION 
.... 1 . The European System 
of Central Banks .......... 2 . The European Monetary Institute 
............ PART B THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS . I . THE CREATION AND THE EVOLVING ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF ......................... GOVERNORS I1 . THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF 
THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS . I . Revised mandate 
of the Committee of Governors ........ I1 . Harmonisation of broad monetary aggregates ......... I11 . The Statute of the European System 
of Central Banks 
and of the European Central 
Bank .................... IV . The Statute of the European Monetary Institute 
....... SUMMARY TABLE : CHART 1 TABLE 1 TABLE 2 TABLE 3 TABLE 4 CHART 2 TABLE 5 TABLE 6 TABLE 7 CHART 3 CHART 4 CHART 5 CHART 6 CHART 7 CHART 8 CHART 9 TABLE 8 CHART 10 Abbreviations and symbols used 
in the Tables and Charts are listed on Pane 
65 Page ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
IN THE COMMUNITY . . . 
. . . . 
. . 
. . . 
. . . . . 
. . . 4 REAL GROWTH AND INFLATION IN THE 
COMMUNITY . . . 
6 DEVELOPMENTS IN REAL GDP 
. . . . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. 18 DEVELOPMENTS IN CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION . . . . 
19 WAGE DEVELOPMENTS (Compensation 
per employee) . . 
22 GENERAL GOVERNMENT BORROWING 
REQUIREMENTS . . . 2 3 
BUDGETARY POSITIONS 
IN THE COMMUNITY . . . 
. . 
. 25 CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCES 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . 
. 26 DEVELOPMENTS IN BROAD MONETARY AGGREGATES 
. . . 
2 8 
MONETARY TARGETS AND 
OUTTURNS . . . . . . . . 
. 29 SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES IN ERM COUNTRIES 
. 31 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
IN INTEREST RATES 
. . . . 
. 3 2 LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES 
IN ERM COUNTRIES 
. . . 
35 EXCHANGE RATES OF THE ECU AGAINST 
THE US 
DOLLAR ANDJAPANESEYEN . . . . 
. . . 
. . . . . . 
. . 
. 3 6 
POSITIONS OF ERM CURRENCIES . . . 
. . . . . . . 38 FORWARD EXCHANGE RATES IN THE 
ERM . . . . . . . 
. 4 0 EXCHANGE RATES 
OF THE GREEK 
DRACHMA AND THE PORTUGUESE ESCUDO . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . 
4 2 ECU FINANCIAL MARKETS 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . 
44 ORGANISATION CHART FOR THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 62 1 Whenever tables and charts provide 
aggregate measures for 
the Community, the ERM and narrow band members, the measures 
are based on countries' participation in 1991. The aggregate measures 
are weighted averages. INTRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT This is the first 
Annual Report of the Committee of Governors on 
its activities and 
on the monetary and financial conditions 
in the Community. The Report 
has been 
prepared in accordance with the Committee's mandate as laid down in the amended Council 
Decision of 
12th March 1990. It covers developments 
during the first one and a 
half years of Stage 
One of Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU), which started on 1st July 1990. Monetary policy co-ordination - the principal 
task of the Committee of Governors The Committee 
of Governors was 
established in 1964 and has 
since then been 
the principal 
forum for co-operation between 
the central banks of 
the EEC Member States. On the entry 
into Stage One of 
EMU the role 
of the 
Committee was considerably strengthened and 
its tasks 
were extended. In particular, additional 
emphasis was placed on the promotion 
of the co-ordination of monetary policies 
with the aim of achieving price stability as 
a necessary condition for 
the proper 
functioning of the European Monetary System (EMS). Although during Stages One and 
Two responsibility for monetary policy remains with 
the national authorities, 
the emphasis on co-ordination in the Committee's mandate reflects the recognition that both 
changes in the economic environment of the Community 
and the objective of creating 
EMU have greatly 
increased the need for compatible monetary 
policies. The gradual realisation 
of a single 
market, in particular the liberalisation 
of capital movements and 
the rapid 
integration of financial markets, 
and the 
enhanced stability of exchange 
rates within the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
(ERM) of the EMS have 
strengthened the interdependence between national 
monetary policies. As a result, the effectiveness of 
monetary policy in Member States is 
becoming increasingly 
dependent upon central bank co-operation. Moreover, the 
agreement to complete EMU within a limited 
number of years has made the 
achievement of a 
high degree of economic 
and financial convergence even more 
urgent. Gearing monetary policies to 
the attainment of 
a stable 
level of prices throughout the Community 
constitutes a crucial element 
in paving the way for 
a successful 
EMU. The co-ordination 
framework Since the start of Stage One further progress 
has been made in co-ordinating monetary policies, 
reflecting the growing consensus on 
the role of monetary 
policy and improvements in the technical aspects 
of the 
co-ordination process. There is a firmly shared conviction in the Community 
that the primary objective of monetary 
policy is to attain 
price stability, as 
a precondition for 
sustainable economic 
growth and social equity. The 
attainment of 
price stability serves as the 
guiding principle for 
the orientation of monetary 
policy in all Community countries 
and the maintenance of price stability 
will be the primary 
objective of monetary policy in full EMU. In order to 
promote this 
common aim, the Committee of Governors has reinforced its efforts 
to improve the co-ordination 
of monetary policies. In particular, as 
a complement 
to the monthly monitoring 
of current conditions 
in financial and foreign exchange markets, 
the Committee 
has introduced 
an annual forward-looking assessment of Member States' monetary policy 
intentions. This 
ex ante assessment has 
the purpose 
of evaluating their mutual 
compatibility before 
final decisions 
on the course 
of monetary policy for the following year 
are taken 
by the national authorities. This exercise is 
followed by regular reviews of the 
outturn in comparison with policy targets to assess the continued appropriateness of 
the stance of national policies in the light of evolving 
developments. In order to base these examinations 
on firmer 
technical grounds, the Committee has begun 
building a 
common analytical framework which uses a system of indicators and common 
assumptions on prospective economic 
developments, and 
which also involves 
the first steps towards improving the 
consistency, to the extent necessary, 
of the 
national definitions of 
broad monetary aggregates. Although still 
in the early stages of 
development, this technical framework has already 
proved valuable. The need 
to strengthen the co-ordination process was heightened by the fact that monetary policies 
have operated in an environment where the authorities' 
commitment to maintain current 
ERM parities has become 
increasingly credible 
to financial market 
participants. This was 
a significant development, given 
events in this period 
which might have 
led to acute 
tensions: the volatility of 
the dollar, the Gulf 
War, developments in Eastern Europe 
and the divergence of 
cyclical positions within 
the Community. Several factors may have 
contributed to the stabilisation 
of exchange rate 
expectations: the political momentum towards 
EMU; the trend towards more convergent inflation rates; 
the narrowing of current-account 
imbalances; and 
a long 
period without a general realignment, reflecting 
the pursuit of 
a "hard currency option" as a means of implementing 
anti-inflationary monetary 
policies. As exchange rate expectations 
became more stable, 
there was a narrowing of 
interest rate differentials 
between Community currencies. As a result, the financial linkages 
within the Community were reinforced and 
the room for independent national 
monetary policies was further restricted. The co-ordinated setting of monetary policies 
for 1991 In the first 
ex ante assessment of the 
orientation of national monetary policies for 1991, 
the Committee of 
Governors agreed 
that the stance of national 
policies should remain geared towards a further 
reduction of inflationary pressures. 
This assessment took into account 
the less favourable growth 
prospects in many Community 
countries, the 
potential repercussions of German unification, and 
the uncertainties in the international environment 
associated with the conflict 
in the Gulf. The execution of monetary policy was broadly in line with the intentions. Most Member States 
registered a 
slowdown in monetary growth, generally meeting 
the quantified targets where 
these were set. At the same time, interest 
rate differentials narrowed markedly, 
with rates converging towards 
the German level, 
which even though increasing 
during the year, remained the lowest in the Community. While monetary policies 
were in line with the course endorsed by the Committee of Governors, results in 1991 were 
mixed (see 
Summary Table). Although for the Community as a whole the rate of inflation - measured in terms of the weighted 
consumer price 
index - declined from 5.7% in 1990 to 5.1% in 1991, with some narrowing 
in inflation differentials, 
this outcome 
is still far 
from the final goal of price stability. 
Moreover, not 
only was inflation in 1991 appreciably higher than 
the average rate 
achieved over 
the 1986 to 1988 
period, but the result 
was also disappointing 
in the light 
of less inflationary external conditions and 
weaker economic activity 
within the Community than had 
been anticipated 
at the time when monetary jUMMARY TABLE: ECONOMIC AND 
FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS IN THE COMMUNITY a) Source: BIS and 
National Data REAL GDP CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION COMPENSATION PER EMPLOYEE CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE 
C) GENERAL GOVERNMENT 
BORROWING REQUIREMENT SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE 
d) LONG-TERM INTEREST RATE 
e) a) All figures are EEC weighted averages. 
b) Estimates c) A negative 
number indicates a deficit. d) 3-month domestic money 
market rate. e) Long-term government 
or public sector bond rate. 1986-88 average 1989 percentage change 
over the previous year 1990 3.2 3.6 6.1 1991 b) 3.6 5.3 6.2 per cent of nominal GDP/GNP 2.8 5.7 7.5 0.8 4.0 1.1 5.1 7.1 0.0 2.9 per cent -0.2 4.5 8.7 9.2 -0.9 4.3 10.9 9.9 11.6 
11.2 10.9 10.3 policy intentions were formulated (see Chart 
1). In addition, the decline 
in the average rate 
of price increase for 
the Community as a whole was largely a reflection of a substantial 
fall in inflation in the United Kingdom, while 
other countries 
with high inflation 
in 1990 made only limited progress. 
Furthermore, inflation rose 
in Germany and the Netherlands, the two Member 
States with traditionally the lowest rates. 
However, some 
countries succeeded 
in maintaining relatively low rates of inflation. The growing 
confidence in the prevailing exchange rate 
parities was beneficial for business decisions and contributed 
to stable conditions 
in financial 
markets. It also allowed countries 
with sluggish economic activity and 
low or rapidly 
falling rates 
of inflation to reduce interest 
rates in the first 
half of 1991 towards German levels. However, there were 
limits on the extent 
to which interest rates 
could be 
lowered without 
creating exchange rate 
tensions. This became evident 
in the second half 
of 1991, after interest 
rate differentials 
within the Community 
had narrowed to historically 
low levels. At the 
end of 
1991, interest rates 
had to be raised in a number of countries to signal the commitment to 
maintaining exchange rate 
stability. Constraints 
on the scope 
for independent interest 
rate changes have also 
been faced 
by countries experiencing strong inflationary pressures, 
making it difficult to keep interest rates 
at levels considered 
high enough to fight inflation. The importance of appropriate fiscal 
policies and waae developments Both the 
resilience of inflation and the conflict 
sometimes experienced between 
the objective 
of exchange rate stability 
and domestic 
considerations highlight 
the importance 
of other factors which affect price performance, notably fiscal 
policies and wage developments. Budget deficits remained excessively high in a number of 
Member States 
in 1991. Indeed, the weighted average 
of general government borrowing 
requirements in the Community rose 
sharply in 1990, despite the fact that 
low deficits were 
maintained in several countries. 
Plans for 
budgetary consolidation in 1991 were seldom fully met, 
and as a result the 
average deficit 
remained well above 4% of GDP. 
As recent experience has 
shown, fiscal imbalances 
are not just a matter of national concern. Changes in demand and 
interest rates 
generated by excessively expansionary 
national fiscal policies 
may affect economic and financial conditions throughout 
the Community 
and complicate the task of monetary policy in pursuing price stability. 
Large budget deficits within the Community have contributed to 
high real interest 
rates, which have 
dampened private investment and have reduced long-run growth potential. Concerns also apply to labour market developments. Nominal 
wages have continued 
to grow rapidly in the Community 
in 1991, 
increasing on 
average by more than 
7%, in spite of generally weaker demand conditions 
and rising unemployment. In this situation the co-ordination of monetary policies is not sufficient on its own to bring about price 
stability. If more significant progress is to be achieved in fighting inflation 
and creating a 
greater degree of economic and financial 
convergence, the national authorities 
will not only have to rein back fiscal deficits where 
they are excessive, but strong efforts should 
also be made to 
contain wage 
pressures. While these considerations apply to 
all Member 
States, they are particularly important in those which play a pivotal role in shaping the economic and financial conditions 
in the Community. Lessons for 
1992 The experience 
of the first eighteen months 
of Stage One 
was a valuable element in the assessment of the appropriate course 
of monetary policy in 1992. When reviewing national policy intentions and targets for 
the current year, the Committee of Governors was in 
full agreement 
that the thrust of the overall stance 
should be 
to promote 
a further decline in 
inflation in the Community. The monetary policies envisaged 
by the national authorities were 
considered to 
be consistent with this aim and should provide a significant anti-inflationary impetus. However, this appraisal 
was contingent upon the assumption that 
the fiscal consolidation 
and the 
moderation in labour cost pressures expected 
in 1992 would indeed be realised. The fulfilment 
of these expectations is crucial since the 
effectiveness of monetary policies in delivering a stable 
price level in the Community is heavily dependent 
upon adequate support 
from fiscal and other policies 
- especially given 
the desire to safeguard exchange rate stability within the Community 
and the more limited 
room for countries 
to set interest rates 
with a view to domestic economic conditions. 
Indeed, there is an urgent need in many Community 
countries to contain 
cost pressures arising from 
excessive wage 
claims, to adjust 
the policy 
mix by reducing fiscal 
deficits and to 
implement supply-side measures in 
order to render market forces more 
effective. Determined efforts in these fields 
are not only crucial 
if further 
progress towards price stability and a 
resumption of sustainable 
economic growth 
are to 
be achieved in 1992, but also to promote the degree 
of economic convergence which is necessary to 
underpin the 
existing ERM central parities 
in the longer run and to demonstrate the resolve to meet 
the conditions 
for entry into Stage Three 
of EMU. The first part of the Report focuses on the work of the Committee of Governors. In the first Chapter 
the activities of 
the Committee are described in greater detail. The second 
Chapter reviews the 
financial and monetary developments 
in the Community 
since the beginning of Stage One 
of EMU. The third Chapter outlines the main features 
of the new monetary institutions to 
be established in accordance with the Treaty on European Union. The second part of 
the Report provides 
an overview of the structure and organisation of 
the Committee of 
Governors. PART A MOhETARY ISSUES AND THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
I. ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS Since the 
beginning of Stage One, the Committee of Governors has 
taken further 
steps to strengthen the co-ordination 
of monetary policies. In addition, the Committee has focused 
on: the monitoring of developments 
in the European Monetary System 
(EMS); the institutional requirements 
for the second and third stages 
of EMU; issues in the field of banking 
supervision and 
payment systems; and relationships with non-Community countries. The Committee 
was assisted by the Committee of Alternates, the sub-committees and working groups, 
and the 
Secretariat and Economic Unit (see Part B of the 
Report). 1. CO-ORDINATION OF MONETARY POLICIES 
The Committee 
of Governors has strengthened 
its efforts to promote the co-ordination 
of monetary policies, in accordance with its revised mandate of March 1990 (see Annex I). To this end, it has 
established a common 
framework for the 
monitoring of monetary policies, which includes regular examinations 
based on a set of commonly agreed 
and mutually consistent 
indicators. Particular emphasis has been 
placed on the enhancement 
of the forward-looking analysis 
of economic and monetary trends 
in the Community. 
Each autumn, before the final decisions 
by the national authorities, 
the Committee assesses 
the national monetary 
policy intentions for the following year. This "ex anten exercise involves, in particular, an appraisal of whether the intended 
intermediate objectives of national 
monetary policies are mutually compatible and consistent 
with the objective of downward convergence 
of inflation rates throughout the Community, taking into account 
the desire to preserve exchange rate stability. 
The forward-looking 
assessments are supplemented by "ex post" surveillance exercises in which developments 
in economic and monetary 
indicators are compared with earlier projections. 
The causes 
of deviations are examined as well as the need and scope for corrective measures. 
In addition, the Committee 
of Governors has continued its practice of 
studying in detail, once a year, developments in public finance and their 
implications for the conduct of monetary policies. 
The anten and "ex post" exercises make use 
of a set of commonly agreed indicators 
and, in addition, allow each central 
bank to take into account the assessment of the other Community central banks. To ensure the broad consistency of the national projections, 
the forward-looking appraisal 
is now based on a common set 
of assumptions on economic and financial 
prospects outside 
the Community. Attention is also being devoted to the development of Community-wide economic indicators, 
to an evaluation of 
the comparability of monetary statistics, and to 
improvements in the analytical framework for 
interpreting monetary aggregates and their 
domestic and foreign counterparts. In the latter respects, a first 
step towards improving 
the consistency of the definitions 
of broad money stocks has 
been made, paying due regard 
to differences in national financial 
structures and behaviour 
and to 
the need to maintain a 
stable relationship 
between national 
monetary aggregates and the final goals of monetary policy (see Annex 11). Some of the Member States have already 
decided to adopt the revised definitions. 
2. MONITORING EMS DEVELOPMENTS 
One of the main tasks of the Committee of Governors 
is to oversee the operation of 
the EMS. This activity includes 
the joint monitoring of current exchange 
rate and monetary policy 
developments, as 
well as the examination of all the other factors 
affecting the 
functioning of the EMS exchange rate 
mechanism. The monitoring follows a 
procedure which was established by the so-called BaslelNyborg agreement of 1987. Each month, exchange rate 
trends are examined and instruments 
used to counteract exchange market 
tensions are reviewed. This review takes account 
of economic developments and the agreement that the available 
instruments to reduce tension (intervention, 
exchange rate movements 
within the band and interest rate changes) 
should be used flexibly and concertedly to promote intra-ERM exchange rate stability. Following the move 
to Stage One 
of EMU, the Committee of Governors has 
supplemented the monthly 
monitoring exercise 
with an annual examination of the 
functioning of the EMS. The first 
examination of this kind took 
place in December 1991 and covered all 
aspects of EMS operations, 
as well as current and prospective policy issues. - 12 - Developments in the use of the private 
ECU have been monitored on 
an annual basis since 1984. 
These examinations include 
assessments of the monetary implications of the growing financial use 
of the ECU, the compatibility of measures taken 
by national and Community authorities and the significance of legal and administrative obstacles to the use of the private ECU. The importance 
of these examinations has increased given 
the rapid expansion of the market (see Chapter 
11, section 2.5) and the 
transformation of the 
present ECU basket 
into the single currency in Stage Three of 
EMU. 3. WORK RELATED TO THE MOVE 
TO THE FINAL STAGE OF 
EMU In June 1989, at its meeting 
in Madrid, the European Council asked the competent 
bodies of the 
Community, including the Committee of Governors, to carry out the preparatory work for the 
organisation of an Intergovernmental Conference to lay down the subsequent stages 
of EMU. In accordance with this mandate, the Committee of Governors submitted to the Intergovernmental Conference on EMU, on 27th November 1990, its proposal 
for a Statute of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) 
and of the 
European Central 
Bank (ECB). In the course of the Intergovernmental Conference, the Committee 
of Governors added provisions covering more 
technical aspects, as well as for 
the arrangements for the transition to 
the final stage of EMU. Furthermore, on 30th October 1991, the Committee of Governors submitted its proposal 
for the Statute of the European Monetary 
Institute (EMI). In addition to this 
preparatory work, the Committee of Governors followed the developments 
at the 
Intergovernmental Conference closely and provided advice in the areas of its competence. 
In accordance with the consultation procedure foreseen in Article 
102 A 
of the EC Treaty, in November 1991, the Committee expressed 
its opinion on the Dutch Presidency's proposal for a Treaty on EMU. The Committee 
of Governors has noted with satisfaction that its preparatory work was well received by the Intergovernmental Conference and that the texts agreed 
upon by the Heads of State 
or of Government in Maastricht in December 1991 reflected closely 
the proposals of the 
Committee (see Chapter 
111). 4. ISSUES IN THE FIELD OF BANKING SUPERVISION AND 
PAYMENT SYSTEMS The revised mandate 
requires the 
Committee of Governors to hold consultations on those issues affecting the 
stability of financial institutions and markets 
which fall within the competence of the central banks. In this context, the Committee 
has examined certain issues 
arising in the field of 
banking supervision and payment 
systems. In the banking supervisory 
field, the Committee 
of Governors has considered a range 
of institution-specific aspects. In particular, the closure of BCCI 
has led the Committee 
to review the implications of this case for 
international banking supervision in conjunction with the competent supervisory 
bodies. In addition, work centred on two major topics. The first concerned the supervision of conglomerates containing a 
bank. In particular, the possible lack of transparency of a 
group's structure and operations can make it 
difficult for 
supervisors to 
take a group-wide 
financial view. This is particularly important given 
the possible risks 
of contagion from problems arising in one part of a conglomerate. A need 
was identified for banking supervisors to 
have discussions with other regulators, especially with those supervising insurance and securities 
markets. The other main theme has been 
the definition of a common 
understanding on the application 
of the Second Banking 
Co-ordination Directive, which 
is due to come into force on 1st January 1993. Before 
this date, a number 
of practical problems need to be resolved. These concern 
the respective future responsibilities of supervisors both in the countries where banking institutions are 
operating and in those where their head 
office is located. 
In this context, valuable technical assistance 
has been 
provided by the "Groupe de Contact" an informal group of 
senior EEC 
banking supervisors. 
In the area of pawlent systems, a number 
of aspects have 
been studied by the Committee of Governors; part of this work is 
currently being prepared by a working group 
which has been 
established on an ad hoc basis. The first 
issue concerns the 
design and operation 
of the ECU Clearing and Settlement 
System, in particular the 
question of whether current procedures 
satisfy the minimum 
standards laid down as a result of the G-10 work on interbank netting schemes. Prior to their 
implementation, the Committee of 
Governors examined the 
intermediation facilities 
provided by the BIS and 
by some national central banks to 
ensure a smooth operation 
of the 
daily clearing. The second aspect relates to the development of payment systems in the context of the 
Single Market and against the 
background of EMU. Work currently being performed is essentially of 
an exploratory nature and 
the Committee of Governors expects to draw some preliminary 
conclusions in the next few months. In addition, the Committee of Governors 
expressed its views on 
the Commission's Discussion Paper "Making Payments in the Internal Market" 
(COM(90)447). Further discussions are now taking place in the Commission's Consultative Group 
on which the Committee of Governors 
is represented by delegates from national central banks. RELATIONSHIPS WITH CENTRAL 
BANKS OUTSIDE THE COMMUNITY 
The Committee 
of Governors 
has continued 
to promote the co-operation with respect to 
developments in exchange markets 
between Community central 
banks and 
the central banks of the 
United States, Canada, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, 
Austria and Switzerland. This co-operation 
provides an important channel of 
information and concerns the pooling of 
data on exchange market developments, intervention and other 
official foreign exchange 
transactions in the so-called "concertation 
proceduren. Moreover, the 
Committee of 
Governors has continued the arrangements with Norges Bank agreed 
in 1984, which provide for regular 
consultations on matters of common interest. In December 1990, following 
the decision taken by the Norwegian authorities to 
peg their currency to 
the ECU, the 
Community central banks agreed 
to extend the bilateral 
co-operation with Norges Bank and concluded bilateral 
swap agreements 
governed by uniform conditions. These 
swap agreements, 
which were renewed at their maturity on 31st December 1991, give Norges Bank 
access to short-term funds for 
intervention purposes 
up to 
the equivalent 
of ECU 2 billion. 
A number of countries outside 
the EMS have established unilateral 
links with the ECU since the start of 
Stage One. Norway (as from 22nd October 1990). Sweden (17th May 1991) and Finland (7th June 
1991) unilaterally pegged their currencies 
to the ECU. With the Austrian Schilling pegged to the Deutsche Mark for many 
years, the move by the three Scandinavian countries 
extended further the 
zone of stable exchange 
rate parities in Europe. 6. CO-OPERATION WITH 
OTHER COMMUNITY BODIES 
In the performance of its tasks and 
functions, the Committee of Governors has 
collaborated with other Community bodies. 
Firstly, the Chairman of the Committee of Governors has attended the Council 
meetings devoted to the multilateral surveillance of member countries' economic policies and 
expressed the 
Committee's views on the consistency 
between monetary and other economic 
policies. In addition, the Governors participated in the informal ECOFIN Council meetings. 
Secondly, the Chairman was invited in March 1991 to attend a meeting of the European Parliament Committee 
on economic and monetary matters and industrial policy. The Chairman informed 
the Committee of the Governors' work on the Statute of the ESCB and 
of the ECB 
as well as on the measures taken 
to strengthen monetary 
policy co-ordination. Thirdly, close co-operation 
with the Commission of the European Communities has continued. Commission representatives attended the meetings of the Committee of Governors and of the Committee 
of Alternates, as well as most of the meetings 
of the sub-committees 
and working groups. Fourthly, the Committee of Governors has contributed to the 
work of the Committee 
on monetary, financial and balance-of-payments statistics which was created by a Council Decision 
in February 1991. A member of the Secretariat has permanent observer status 
on this Committee, whose work 
aims at improving the consistency of statistical data. 
Finally, the Committee of Governors has closely followed 
the work of the Monetary Committee. 
Links with this Committee are 
ensured by the central bank representatives, who 
in most cases are the Alternates 
of the 
Governors. 11. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
AND MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION 
1. THE ECONOMIC BACKGROUND TO MONETARY POLICY 
After the 
strong upswing in the late 1980s, economic growth in the Community as a 
whole has slowed down sharply over 
the last 
two years. However, there have 
been marked differences 
in the experience of individual 
countries. Whereas economic conditions 
in western Germany 
remained buoyant, growth decelerated 
elsewhere in the Community (see Table 
1). Nevertheless, inflation, which had risen in most countries in the period of rapid demand 
growth, is 
proving hard 
to eradicate (see 
Table 2). During 1991, the average inflation rate 
in the Community fell, although 
in many countries 
the decline was quite modest, 
and in some traditionally low-inflation 
countries inflation 
quickened. Economic 
conditions in the rest of the 
world, as well as German unification 
and other factors internal to 
the Community, account for 
these developments. 
1.1 External environment Since the middle 
of 1990, world 
economic activity has weakened 
more sharply than first expected, 
thus reducing 
the demand for 
Community exports and dampening growth in 
the Community. As private sector confidence 
was dented by the Gulf crisis, 
the United States 
economy slipped into recession in late 1990 and early 1991. Signs of a 
subsequent turnaround have been uneven 
and fragile: indications of some 
improvement have often 
been shortly followed 
by other signals suggesting protracted 
weakness. The 
resulting uncertainty 
surrounding prospects 
for US monetary policy and 
expected interest rate differentials against 
other major currencies 
triggered sharp swings in the dollar exchange rate. In the event, slow 
monetary growth, 
as well as other signs that inflationary pressures 
were abating, led the Federal Reserve to ease monetary 
policy on a number of occasions throughout 
the period, 
reducing short-term interest rates to 
the present low level. Elsewhere, the economic cycle in Japan lagged behind 
that of the North American 
economies and has been less pronounced, while 
in EFTA markets, 
which account for 
a greater proportion 
of Community exports than the United States 
and Japan combined, 
demand conditions have been 
subdued. Eastern Europe accounts 
for only 
a small share 
of Community countries' trade at present, and hence the reform 
process and the 
problems of the 
former USSR have 
had relatively little 
direct economic impact 
on the TABLE 1: DEVELOPMENTS IN REAL GDP 
Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: 
OECD a) Estimates b) GNP TABLE 2: DEVELOPMENTS IN CONSUMER PRICE 
INFLATION Source: BIS; National Data Belgium Denmark Germany (western) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal 
United Kingdom EEC : average ERM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States Japan 12 months Dec.90 3.5 1.9 2.8 22.8 6.5 3.4 2.7 6.6 4.4 2.7 13.7 9.3 5.8 5.3 4.0 6.1 3.8 percentage change over 
the to Dec.91 2.8 2.3 4.2 17.8 5.5 3.1 3.6 
6.1 2.6 4.9 9.6 
4.5 4.8 4.5 4.3 3.1 
2.7 1986-88 average 1.3 4.1 0.5 17.7 6.3 2.8 3.0 
5.2 0.6 0.0 10.3 4.2 3.6 3.2 2.5 3.2 0.5 previous 1989 3.1 4.8 2.8 13.7 6.8 3.6 4.0 6.3 3.4 1.1 12.6 7.8 5.3 5.0 3.9 4.8 2.3 year 1990 3.5 2.6 2.7 20.4 6.7 3.4 3.4 6.5 3.7 2.5 13.4 9.5 5.7 5.3 3.9 5.4 3.1 - 1991 3.2 2.4 
3.5 18.9 5.9 3.1 3.2 
6.4 3.1 3.9 11.4 5.9 5.1 4.7 4.2 4.3 3.3 Community. However, given 
the geo-political ties between the 
regions and 
prospects of growing 
economic integration, Community 
financial markets have 
from time to time been 
affected by developments in the eastern 
bloc. The slowdown in the world 
economy has contributed to a reduction in global inflation. Non-oil commodity prices fell sharply 
in the second half of 
1990 to their lowest level for 
around three 
years and remained 
subdued through 1991. The oil 
price hike in the autumn of 
1990 was short-lived, and 
in 1991 the average dollar price 
was only a little higher 
than the level 
preceding the Gulf crisis. Furthermore, profit margins 
on traded manufactured goods have 
been squeezed, as companies have 
tried to maintain market 
shares on both domestic and export 
markets. Weak 
world trade prices have 
helped to moderate inflation 
in the Community. 1.2 German unification The unification 
of Germany 
in the second half of 1990 has had a 
profound economic impact, not 
only in Germany, but also in the rest 
of the Community. Unification has given 
rise to a large fiscal expansion to 
support incomes and 
to encourage investment 
in eastern Germany during 
the difficult adjustment period. Output in eastern Germany has plummeted, although 
tentative signs have recently emerged that a 
pick-up is 
underway. Despite the collapse in domestic production, eastern German demand rose 
sharply following unification, 
financed largely 
by government transfers. This surge in demand came 
at a time 
when the western German 
economy was already operating at a high level 
of capacity. Consequently, the 
stimulus not only boosted output in Germany but also supported activity in other Member States. The surge in demand led to a sharp 
increase in German imports 
and a 
diversion of exports 
in 1990 and the first half of 
1991 and, as 
a result, all Community countries have 
improved their bilateral 
trade position with 
Germany, in some cases by well over 1% of GDP. 
At the same 
time, the strong 
demand in Germany fuelled 
domestic inflationary pressures. 
These pressures have been countered 
by a series 
of increases in interest rates, which have 
also affected interest rate 
conditions elsewhere 
in the Community. 
1.3 Economic performance and 
nominal convernence in the Community In spite of the surge 
in output in western Germany, the 
cyclical downturn in the Community as a whole has proved sharper than foreseen in mid-1990. This reflected the marked slowdown in external markets and weaker 
domestic spending, as real 
interest rates remained 
high and private sector 
confidence recovered 
only slowly after the 
Gulf War. Following six years 
of relatively strong growth, real GDP 
in the Community increased by only 1.1% in 1991, the lowest rate 
since 1982. As activity weakened, unemployment 
in the Community began to 
rise. Developments at the 
aggregate level mask 
an increased cyclical 
divergence between the individual Member 
States. Although growth weakened 
through 1991, the level 
of economic 
activity in western Germany has 
remained high, in marked contrast 
to the recession experienced in the United Kingdom. 
In the other 
countries, growth has 
slowed sharply, although 
it remained above 2% in Spain, Luxembourg and Portugal. The only exception 
to the 
slowdown was Greece where 
economic activity recovered 
marginally. Since the 
start of Stage One, 
the average rate 
of inflation and 
the dispersion across 
countries have narrowed modestly. 
For 1991 as a whole, consumer price inflation in the Community 
on a weighted basis fell only to around 5%, well 
above the 
rates of under 
4% experienced in the period from 1986 to 1988. 
Although external influences and the slowdown in economic activity have 
generally been 
conducive to inflation reduction, 
persistently strong growth 
in wages and inadequate fiscal consolidation in 
many countries hindered more 
significant progress (see 
Tables 3 and 4). In addition, structural rigidities, including insufficient flexibility 
in labour markets, continue to hamper the disinflationary 
process. In the high-inflation countries, the 
rate of increase of prices 
was much lower in sectors open to foreign 
competition than in the more sheltered parts of the 
economy. The convergence 
of price performance in the Community has 
been partly of 
the wrong 
kind, as inflation 
rates have risen significantly 
in Germany and 
the Netherlands, the Community countries with the best historical record in terms of 
price stability. This 
deterioration reflected a marked 
pick-up in wage settlements as well 
as increases in taxes and 
other public sector prices. 
With the exception of Italy, where 
the average rate of price increase 
in 1991 was 
essentially unchanged, the other 
Community countries 
succeeded in lowering inflation in 1991, although to 
varying extents. In the five countries (Belgium, Denmark, France, 
Ireland and Luxembourg) which, 
together with Germany and the Netherlands, 
had relatively low rates of inflation in 1990, the improvement was limited to a maximum of 0.5 percentage point and 
in most cases 
was less. Denmark had 
the TABLE 3: WAGE DEVELOPMENTS 
(Compensation per Employee) a) Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: OECD Belgium Denmark Germany (western) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom EEC : average EM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States c) Japan c) a) Whole economy; increase in nominal 
terms. b) Estimates 
c) Data covers the business sector 
only, and may thus not 
be directly comparable 
with the data for the 
EEC countries. previous year 1991 b) 5.4 3.2 6.2 16.1 8.7 4.7 7.0 8.3 4.7 4.4 17.8 8.2 7.1 6.8 6.1 4.0 3.8 percentage 1986-88 average 2.9 5.7 3.2 13.9 7.7 4.6 5.4 8.2 3.7 2.2 17.6 8.2 6.1 5.8 4.9 4.3 3.2 change 1989 3.6 3.8 3.0 17.8 6.3 
4.6 6.5 8.7 6.5 0.8 16.4 9.1 6.2 5.9 4.9 2.9 3.9 over the 
1990 5.9 3.4 4.7 20.0 7.9 5.4 3.8 10.4 5.2 3.3 18.4 9.7 7.5 7.1 6.3 3.8 4.5 TABLE 4: GENERAL GOVERNMENT BORROWING REQUIREMENTS a) a) Negative numbers indicate a 
fiscal surplus. 
b) Estimates c) Up to 1989 western Germany only; 
1990 on the basis of all German borrowing requirement over 
western German GDP; 1991 on the basis of figures of all 
Germany. lowest rate of inflation 
in 1991 at 
2.4%. Elsewhere, against 
a background 
of weak economic activity, inflation fell 
dramatically in the United Kingdom following 
sterling's entry into the ERM; in Spain, the rate declined steadily, 
but only slowly; and in Greece and Portugal, average inflation in 1991 dropped by between 1 and 2 percentage points, although 
a much sharper decline 
was recorded through the year. The trend towards a 
gradual reduction in fiscal deficits 
in the late 1980s 
has been reversed in the past two 
years in some countries. Although the deficit 
remained low in several countries, the combined 
deficit at the general 
government level rose 
from around 3% of Community 
GDP in 1989 to some 4.5% in 1990, and remained 
near that level 
in 1991. The deterioration in budgetary performance can be attributed to several factors: German unification; 
the slowdown in economic growth; and, in some countries, to slippage in the control of government spending. 
Differences in the budgetary positions of Member States 
remain substantial 
(see Chart 2). While five 
countries had general government 
deficits under 3% of GDP in 1991, at the other end of 
the spectrum the 
deficit was around 10% in Italy, and around 
15% in 
Greece. The levels 
of public sector 
debt diverge markedly and 
in three Community countries 
remain above 
100% of GDP. Current-account imbalances in Germany and the 
United Kingdom have 
narrowed markedly 
over the past 
two years (see Table 5). In Germany, the fiscal expansion 
associated with unification has 
absorbed the previously 
large national 
savings surplus, with the 
current account moving from a surplus of almost 
5% of GDP in 1989 to a deficit of over 
1% in 1991. In the United Kingdom, the 
recovery of personal sector savings 
and the 
cutback in corporate investment have 
been reflected 
in a marked decline 
in the current-account deficit. In Greece the deficit fell 
from over 5% of GDP in 
1990 to 2% in 1991. Elsewhere in the Community, a sizable current-account deficit persisted 
in Spain, financed by substantial long-term 
capital inflows attracted by profitable investment opportunities. 
The Netherlands has continued to 
record a large current-account surplus. 
2. MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE 
DEVELOPMENTS In Stage One, although the responsibility for monetary 
policy remains at the national level, the liberalisation of 
capital flows 
and b) General Government 
Borrowing Requirement, 1991 (National Sources) CHART 2: BUDGETARY POSITIONS IN THE 
COMMUNITY (per cent of nominal GDPIGNP) 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 20° PUBLIC 1 40 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 a) Gross Debt 
of General Government, end of 1990 (Commission Sources) BUDGET DEFICIT 
b) DEBT a) - - BE - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - LU . 1 I -5 0 5 10 15 I I I TABLE 5: CURRENT ACCOUNT OF THE BALANCE OF 
PAYMENTS a) Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: OECD Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Germany c) d) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom EEC : average ERM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States c) Japan c) a) Negative numbers indicate a deficit 
b) Estimates c) In per cent of nominal GNP d) Up to June 
1990 western Germany 
only. per 1986-88 average 2.3 -3.2 4.3 -2.9 0.3 -0.2 0.2 -0.1 2.3 
0.9 -1.7 0.8 0.8 1.5 -3.2 3.5 cent of 1989 2.3 -1.1 4.8 -4.7 -2.9 -0.5 1.5 -1.2 3.8 0.4 -4.7 0.0 0.1 1.5 -2.0 2.0 nominal GDP 1990 1.9 1.1 3.1 -5.4 -3.4 -0.7 3.4 -1.3 3.9 -0.1 -3.2 -0.2 -0.1 0.9 -1.7 1.2 1991 b) 
2.0 1.7 -1.2 -2.1 -3.0 -0.5 4.8 -1.7 3.9 -1.1 -1.2 -0.9 -0.8 -0.5 -0.1 2.1 rapid financial integration have 
strengthened the interdependence between national policies 
in the context of the ERM. Most indicators suggest that 
monetary policies have been firm since the start of Stage One and have 
thus generally favoured 
progress towards lower 
inflation in an 
environment of stable exchange rates 
between Community currencies. 
However, in many Member 
States wage and fiscal 
developments have not 
provided sufficient support 
to monetary policy. 2.1 The stance of monetary ~olicy Due to the long and variable lags in the transmission of monetary policy, the monetary 
stance must 
be appraised on the basis of 
medium-run trends. Developments in monetary aggregates and interest rates 
provide useful evidence for this assessment. 
Monetary amregates Growth rates 
of the 
key broad monetary aggregates have 
moderated in most countries over the last 
two years (see 
Table 6). A deceleration is also evident in the broad monetary aggregates which 
have been harmonised 
for the internal use 
of the Committee of 
Governors (see Annex 11). The slowdown in monetary growth, although 
partly reflecting the weakening in 
economic activity, indicates that monetary policies tended 
to exert downward pressure on inflation. In the countries 
which announce targets, monetary growth has 
generally been 
within or close to the published ranges over 
this period 
(see Table 
7). However, in Germany, monetary growth accelerated 
in late 1991, fuelled by buoyant credit 
demand, and as a 
result the target was 
exceeded. In Spain, the overshooting in 1991 partly reflected capital inflows. In an environment of stable exchange rate 
expectations and 
liberalised capital movements, 
these inflows ultimately 
stemmed from the substantial government 
borrowing requirement. 
A similar mechanism 
led to an overshooting in Italy in 1990 and Portugal 
in 1991. Furthermore, shifts in portfolio behaviour, often 
related to financial deregulation and innovation 
or to changes 
in taxation, partly accounted for deviations 
from targets in both directions, 
as experienced in Greece, Spain, France and 
Italy. The 
avoidance of distortions from financial 
shifts was one 
of the important factors behind the revisions in the national definitions 
of broad money in 
several countries. 
TABLE 6: DEVELOPMENTS IN BROAD MONETARY AGGREGATES a) Source: BIS and National 
Data Belgium Denmark Germany b ) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom United States Japan a) National definitions of broad money stocks 
are not suffi- 
ciently similar to be aggregated at the Community 
level (see Annex 11). The following aggregates have been selected: 
Belgium: M4e; Denmark: M National; Germany: M3; Greece: M3; Spain: (new) ALP; France: (new) M3; Ireland: M3; Italy: M2; Netherlands: M3; Portugal: L-; United Kingdom: M4; United States: M2; Japan: M2tCD. b) Up to 
1990, western Germany only. 
4th quarter/4th 1986-88 average 9.8 5.9 6.7 22.4 14.2 8.4 4.8 9.1 4.8 20.3 16.5 6.2 10.2 quarter 1989 10.5 4.3 4.7 23.8 15.3 9.1 4.6 8.8 13.0 7.7 18.9 4.7 10.5 percentage 1990 6.9 8.1 5.6 15.1 
10.4 8.1 16.7 9.9 6.8 16.0 12.1 3.8 9.2 change 1991 7.3 5.7 5.2 7.2 11.3 4.1 5.2 8.3 
5.8 15.0 5.5 2.7 3.1 TABLE 7. MONETARY TARGETS AND OUTTURNS a) A. Countries setting targets for 
money supply 
growth Target 1990 1991 1992 Variable Target Outturn Target outturn Target Germany M3 4-6 5.6 3-5 b) 5.2 3.5-5.5 Greece M3 19-21 14.2 14-16 11.7 
(8.3) e) 9-12 d) Spain M 3 
- - - 7-11 d) ALP 6.5-9.5 11.3 7-11 12.1 (10.9) e) 8-11 d) France M2 3.5-5.5 -0.5 
- - - M3 - - 5-7 d) 4.1 4-6 Italy M2 6-9 9.9 5-8 8.9 5-7 d) Portugal M 3 
- - - - 12-15 d) L - - 11.5 12 15.2 12-16 United Kingdom MO 1-5 2.5 0-4 2.8 December c) - B. Countries setting targets for the domestic source 
of money supply growth r--' Target 1990 1991 1992 Variable Target Outturn Target outturn Target Denmark DMC f) - -0.9 4-7 1.3 4-7 Netherlands Bank's DMC 
f) 6 6 7-8 11.0 7-8 Source: National Data "-" target not set 
a) Targets are set for 
a calendar year (4th 
qrt./4th qrt. or Dec./Dec.) except in the 
UK (March/March). The 1990 and 1991 outturn columns report the corresponding 
growth rate of the respective 
variable. No monetary 
target is set in 
Belgium, Ireland and Luxembourg. b) Revised from 
4-6% at the mid-year target review. 
c) Annualised percentage change 
between the 
base period and 
the last month. 
d) Target refers to a revised definition of the aggregate. e) Figures in 
parentheses show the 1991 
outturn for the revised definition to be used in 1992. f) Domestic money creation 
(Denmark: growth in 
"Lending to residents in domestic currency + Stock of bonds denominated in domestic currency 
- Special deposits". Netherlands: growth in "Lending 
to domestic private 
sector + long-term lending to domestic government 
- domestic non-monetary liabilities"). Interest rates 
In the two years 
prior to Stage One, there had 
been a significant tightening of monetary 
policies in the Community 
to counter the revival 
of inflationary pressure stemming 
from rapid demand growth. 
Through 1988 and 1989, three-month nominal 
interest rates rose 
on average by around 3 percentage points, 
with particularly strong 
increases in the United Kingdom and Spain, where 
the overheating 
of the economy was most pronounced (see Chart 3). The rise 
in short-term rates 
in this period exceeded 
the increase in inflation. In the countries whose currencies participate 
in the narrow 
band of the ERM, short-term rates have remained rather high subsequently. Indeed, in Germany and the Netherlands rates 
have risen 
significantly over 
the eighteen months under 
review. In the other narrow-band members, 
rates in late 1991 had returned to their mid-1990 levels, although 
there had been 
some broadly offsetting swings 
in interest rates during the interim 
(see Chart 4). At the end of 1990, a general upward 
movement in short-term interest rates 
was triggered by concerns about unfavourable 
price movements, arising 
partly from the oil price hike in connection with the Gulf crisis, 
but also from adverse wage developments and widening 
budget deficits, especially in Germany. With oil prices 
returning quickly to 
the pre-Gulf levels 
in early 1991, most 
Community countries sought to 
lower short-term interest rates, although rates 
remained broadly unchanged 
in Germany and the Netherlands, as 
strong inflationary pressures continued. 
In the other countries 
participating in the narrow band, inflationary 
forces were receding and growth 
prospects deteriorating, and, as exchange 
market sentiment supported greater convergence 
in the level of nominal 
interest rates, official interest rates were 
reduced significantly 
towards the lower 
German levels. As a result, interest rate 
differentials vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark declined to 
historically low levels and in some cases were 
largely eliminated 
in the first half of 1991 (see Chart 3). During the second half, the 
persistence of inflationary pressures 
and strong monetary 
growth in Germany led to further increases 
in official interest rates. As foreign exchange market 
sentiment suggested 
that limits to 
the reduction of interest rate differentials 
had been reached, 
the increases in German interest rates 
were accompanied by increases in the other narrow-band 
countries; in some cases interest 
differentials temporarily widened. 
z 2 0, Q) (D W 01 awu owzl- CHART 4: RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN INTEREST RATES BELGIUM DENMARK 3 M. DOMESTIC .-..- BONDS GERMANY I 12 GREECE - 3 M. DOMESTIC BONDS FRANCE - - 3M.DOMEsTIC - .---- BONDS - - - - - - ., - - - - - - - 11111111111 11111111111 11111111111 CHART 4: (continued) IRELAND 13 NETHERLANDS 3 M. DOMESTIC -m--- BONDS P 10 10 UNITED KINGDOM ITALY 15 - 3 M DOMESTIC - --..- BONDS - - - - - - - - - Illllllllll 11111111111 11l11111111 PORTUGAL 17 17 EEC (Weighted avg.) and USA l3 l l3 - EEC. 3 M. DOMESTIC . . 
. . . 
EEC BONDS USA. 3 M. DOMESTIC . - -. . USA: BONDS 4 89 90 91 In the two 
countries - the United 
Kingdom and Spain - whose currencies participate 
in the wide band of the 
ERM and 
where interest rates had risen particularly strongly 
in 1988-89, short-term rates have 
been reduced substantially 
since the start of Stage 
One. The decline 
reflected progress in reducing inflation and, 
in the case of Spain, also 
the strength 
of the 
peseta. In the second half of 
1991, there were signs that 
limits to the narrowing of interest rate 
differentials between the pound sterling and the narrow-band currencies were 
being approached. Outside the ERM, short-term 
rates rose sharply in Portugal and 
Greece in the second half of 1990. Rates have 
remained high through 1991 to signal the 
authorities' determination 
to bring inflation closer to 
the levels elsewhere 
in the Community. 
Long-term interest 
rates in the Community 
had also risen 
in 1988-89, but 
the increases were 
less pronounced than those 
of short-term rates, resulting 
in flatter, and in some cases 
inverted, yield 
curves (see Charts 4 and 5). Between the middle of 
1990 and 
the end of 1991, long-term 
rates fell 
in the narrow-band countries. The decline, however, 
was smallest in Germany and the 
Netherlands and 
hence long-term interest rate 
differentials also narrowed, albeit to 
a lesser extent than the differentials in the money markets. As with short-term rates, long-term 
rates came 
down more sharply in Spain and the United Kingdom. 
Long-term rates have also fallen markedly 
in Portugal. Although various factors 
may influence long-term interest rates, 
their decline suggests that expectations of future inflation 
decreased. Long-term rates have fallen 
further in early 1992. 2.2 Exchange rate 
developments in the ERM The most notable feature of recent exchange 
market developments has been the stability 
of conditions 
within the ERM. This stands 
in marked contrast to the global 
environment of large, and at times erratic, movements of 
the exchange rates of 
third currencies vis-h-vis the ERM currencies (see Chart 
6). Participation in the ERM was extended in October 1990 when the pound sterling joined the 
mechanism, with a fluctuation margin 
of *6%. The ERM has functioned smoothly since 
the start 
of Stage One and the occasional periods of tension have not 
seriously threatened 
the maintenance of central parities. The overall stability 
of the system is all 
the more striking in the light of various 
factors which could have 
resulted CHART5: LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES IN ERM COUNTRIES *) ORIGINAL NARROW BAND COUNTRIES 15 ,., BELGIUM ...... DENMARK - GERMANY - ,,,, FRANCE ............ IRELAND . NETHERLANDS .L. -. . . -. . . 
. . 
. . . * . . 
- OTHER ERM 
COUNTRIES *) Government or public sector bonds 
in more extensive exchange rate tensions. 
These include 
the volatility of the US dollar; the 
considerable uncertainty associated 
with the Gulf crisis; political and economic upheaval 
in Central and Eastern Europe; 
and the divergence between 
the cyclical positions of 
Community countries. 
Possible explanations for the increase 
in stability of 
exchange rates are 
discussed in the next 
section. The behaviour of individual currencies suggests 
that nominal 
interest rate 
differentials have been a 
major factor determining exchange 
rate movements 
in the fluctuation band, with high yielding currencies often 
approaching the upper margin 
(see Chart 
7). In the wide band, 
the Spanish 
peseta remained consistently 
in the upper half of its fluctuation 
margin, sometimes reaching the upper 
intervention rate. In the narrow band, 
the Italian lira 
was often the strongest currency. 
When interest rates 
firmed in Germany during 
the second half of 1990 and again 
in 1991, the Deutsche Mark moved into 
the upper part of the narrow band, 
accompanied by the Dutch guilder and the Belgian 
franc. In contrast, in France and Denmark, where 
the authorities lowered interest rates 
when possible, their respective 
currencies tended to remain 
in the lower part of the 
narrow band. Some exchange rate strains have arisen, however, 
when market participants considered that interest rate 
differentials did not correspond to perceived exchange 
risks. On two occasions, in the summer 
of 1990 and the spring of 1991, high-yielding 
currencies (the Spanish peseta, 
joined in the first instance 
by the Italian lira) were for a time at, or close to, 
their respective upper intervention limits 
against a currency or currencies with relatively low interest rates (the French franc, 
joined in the first instance by the Deutsche Mark 
and the Dutch guilder). In late 1990, the currencies of 
some ERM countries in relatively weak cyclical positions came 
under downward 
pressure as the Deutsche 
Mark strengthened in response to 
higher German interest rates 
and the weakness 
of the US dollar. Finally, there were tensions in late 1991 related to the 
increase in German rates. Episodes of tension were 
quickly countered 
by the monetary authorities 
by intra-marginal interventions, 
interest rate changes and movements in the band. 2.3 Factors behind ERM stability A major reason for 
the smooth operation of the 
ERM over this 
period has been the 
assessment by market participants that prospects for the maintenance of exchange rate parities had improved. 
This development 
is - CHART 7: POSITIONS OF ERM CURRENCIES Weekly averages 
of percentage deviations 
from central rates a) 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 1 1 0 0 -1 -1 1989 1990 1991 a) The distance between 
two currencies represents 
the percentage difference between 
their market exchange rate and their bilateral 
central parity. 
The Spanish peseta and 
the British pound entered the 
ERM wide band in June 1989 
and October 1990, respectively. 
b) In January 1990, the Italian lira 
entered the narrow band, 
and its central rate was adjusted downwards, 
while keeping unchanged 
the lower limit of the band. 
in turn linked to the 
effective policy 
measures taken 
by the national central banks to counter periods 
of tensions. As market participants expected authorities to 
counteract exchange 
market tensions, 
the incentive to take foreign exchange 
positions in favour of a 
realignment was 
reduced. As a result, the 
stabilising properties of 
the system were reinforced. While difficult 
to assess and 
to quantify, evidence from 
two sources suggests that market 
expectations of a 
realignment diminished in the period under review. A first 
indicator, which sheds some light 
on short-run expectations, is 
the forward 
exchange rate. If the forward exchange rate is 
outside the 
maximum range allowed 
by the fluctuation band, 
this can be interpreted 
as signalling the expectations 
of a realignment over the relevant 
time horizon. 
Indeed, the above indicator using 
the twelve-month forward 
rates vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark suggests that market 
expectations of a realignment 
have been 
the lowest since the inception 
of the EMS (see Chart 
8). A second indicator of exchange 
rate expectations is provided by long-term interest rate differentials, 
which supply information on the credibility of parities 
over a longer period. Although the differential 
should be 
interpreted with caution because of 
the different 
rnaturities, fiscal treatment and 
liquidity of the bonds being compared, the progressive 
reduction in long-term interest rate differentials vis-8-vis the Deutsche Mark during Stage 
One again suggests stronger 
market confidence 
in the maintenance of central parities in the ERM (see Chart 
5). Strengthened market 
confidence may be ascribed 
to several factors, some reflecting structural 
and political developments as well as 
others of 
a conjunctural nature. Firstly, the absence of a 
general realignment since 
January 1987 demonstrates policy-makers' growing 
awareness of the 
potential drawbacks of changes 
in parities, both 
in terms of the resulting 
inflationary stimulus 
and the damage to the credibility 
of their "hard currency policyn. Moreover, the removal 
of capital controls and 
the political momentum towards EMU have further 
added to confidence 
in the authorities* commitment 
to exchange rate stability. Secondly, differences 
in inflation performance in the Community have declined, and 
the largest current-account imbalances 
in countries participating 
in the ER. have narrowed. Finally, market 
perceptions of the impact 
of German unification 
tended to reduce 
the relative strength 
of the Deutsche Mark 
in the ERM for much of this 
period, easing the pressures on other currencies associated 
7 V) 2 G , m .c IS) 0 m C 'D 9 5 C so > c 0 'D .= a, m IS) = m ti - c 2 a, - U - & S Q% m a, z a, Q 2 5 IS) UJ 6': 5 2 3 Q 2 c 2 L% .2 a, fn = E { .- - a, a, g: - with the maintenance 
of high interest 
rates in Germany. However, the Deutsche Mark regained its relative strength in the ERM in the second half of 1991, as the Deutsche Bundesbank raised official 
interest rates twice to 
reaffirm its determination 
to continue a stability-oriented 
monetary policy. Monetary authorities have also fostered stability 
by reacting quickly and 
effectively to episodes of exchange 
market tensions. Policy 
responses complied with the principles of the 
1987 Basle-Nyborg Agreement, 
which calls on the authorities to make flexible 
and co-ordinated use of interest rate changes, intervention, 
and the scope 
for movement within 
the band. The relative importance 
of the instruments employed differed from 
country to country, depending on 
the authorities' 
assessment of the source of the tensions and 
of the likely impact of the policy 
change on domestic economic conditions. 
While in some countries - such as Belgium and the 
Netherlands - the authorities relied primarily 
on changes in interest rates, in others - such as Italy 
and the United 
Kingdom - the scope 
for exchange rate movements within 
the band has been 
used more actively. The 
intensity and frequency of foreign exchange market intervention also 
differed, but 
it is noteworthy that intervention 
was in general accompanied by the use of 
other instruments. 
2.4 Exchange rate policies of 
non-ERM countries 
Portugal and Greece have 
strengthened to different degrees 
the links between 
their currencies and those participating 
in the ERM to assist 
the fight against inflation and 
to prepare the ground 
for eventual 
entry into the mechanism (see 
Chart 9). With effect from 1st October 1990, 
Portugal abandoned its long-standing crawling-peg 
policy and 
allowed the escudo to fluctuate within 
an undisclosed band against a basket of 
ERM currencies. The high interest 
rate differential 
in favour of the 
escudo attracted large capital inflows, 
complicating monetary management and 
contributing to 
an overshooting of 
the monetary 
target. This 
was counteracted by the temporary re-imposition of controls on short-term capital flows. In Greece foreign exchange 
policy is also geared 
towards inflation reduction. Drachma depreciation 
no longer fully offsets 
the inflation and 
labour cost differentials 
vis-8-vis major trading partners, 
thus adding 
to competitive pressures in the economy. 
CHART 9: EXCHANGE RATES 
OF THE 
GREEK DRACHMA 
AND PORTUGUESE ESCUDO *) (AGAINST ERM CURRENCIES) Greek drachma 
Portuguese escudo 
*) Percentage deviation from the level 
of July 1990 (increase = appreciation of GRD or 
PTE) ERM corresponds to a 
weighted average of the ERM currencies 
(using normalised ECU weights). 
2.5 Develo~ments in the Private 
ECU The official ECU, defined as a currency 
basket composed of 
specific amounts of the currencies 
of the EEC Member 
States, came into 
existence in March 1979 at the inception 
of the EMS. It is used 
within the EMS to express the central 
exchange rate 
of participating currencies, to denominate certain claims 
and liabilities, and as a reserve instrument. The 
introduction of the official ECU 
has stimulated the 
evolution of a market 
in private ECUs, created by commercial banks. This market 
is being used 
on a significant 
and growing scale by public authorities and by the private sector. To date, 
the most important usage of 
the private ECU has been 
in financial domain (see Table 8). The ECU still has to make 
a breakthrough 
in the non-financial sphere; its use as 
an invoicing currency 
and as a means 
of settlement of non-financial transactions remains 
very limited. There is a substantial bond market denominated 
in private ECUs, with outstanding bonds amounting 
to ECU 110 billion at the end of September 1991. The share 
of total 
international bond issues denominated in ECU has been rising sharply; it was 12% in the first nine months of 1991 (compared with 34% for the US dollar and 11% for the Japanese 
yen), making it the second 
most commonly-used 
currency for international 
bond issuance in that period. Furthermore, there is a sizable market 
in short-term ECU 
securities, both in the form of Treasury bills 
and commercial 
paper. The ECU banking market has also attained a significant 
scale, with nearly ECU 
180 billion of 
lending outstanding 
at end-September 1991, of which ECU 
46 billion represented loans to non-banks. 
ECU banking is continuing to expand strongly at a time when the overall market, and all 
other major currency sectors, are 
contracting. Furthermore, whereas in the past the growth 
of ECU banking business 
was dominated by a demand for ECU 
credit, since 1989 there has been a tendency for 
ECU deposits to grow faster than ECU 
lending. This tendency was partly related to the 
accumulation of ECU reserves by central banks; as a result, the banking 
system has gradually reduced its net asset position and 
has become a 
net borrower of ECUs 
as from 1991. The strong expansion of ECU markets appears 
to have 
been related to continued market perception 
of the ECU's merits as a vehicle 
to hedge against exchange 
and interest rate 
risks. In addition, the Intergovernmental Conference 
on EMU and the prospective role of 
the ECU in the Third Stage appear 
to have stimulated the 
financial use of 
the private 
TABLE 8: ECU FINANCIAL MARKETS 
a) Source: BIS International Bonds Domestic Bonds 
Treasury Bills Euro-commercial paper 
and notes Bank Assets - interbank - other Bank Liabilities - interbank - other Memorandum Item: Central Banks' holdings of private ECUs a) There is an overlap, in particular between the securities and banking markets, owing to the role of banks as both issuers and holders of ECU securities; thus 
the total size of the market is less than 
the sum 
of the individual markets given 
in this table. ECU billion outstanding 
Sep. 1991 72.3 39.2 7.9 9.7 175.7 (129.8) (45.9) 180.9 (143.1) (37.8) 34.1 Dec. 1989 45.9 24.4 10.3 2.9 128.2 (97.4) (30.8) 116.9 (92.4) (24.5) 17.0 (end of period) Dec. 1990 54.7 35.2 8.4 6.1 148.6 (114.3) (34.3) 149.8 (118.2) (31.6) 27.1 ECU. It should also be recalled that 
the authorities 
of some Community countries and 
supranational institutions continue 
to play an important role in the ECU financial markets. For example, 
around half of the 
outstanding stock of 
international ECU 
bonds have been issued 
by national governments 
and international institutions, 
predominantly in the Community, with the balance of the funds borrowed by the business sector. Some central 
banks also hold the 
private ECU as a reserve asset. 
At the 
end of 
September 1991 
central banks together held ECU 34 billion of such reserves. In many cases these 
assets were acquired from the proceeds 
of government borrowing in ECUs. On a number of occasions central 
banks have undertaken intervention 
in private ECUs 
in the foreign exchange 
market. Derivative financial products in ECUs have been 
launched by the London and Paris 
Futures exchanges, including an ECU long-bond future 
and a 
three-month interest 
rate future. PROSPECTS AND MONETARY POLICY ISSUES 
When conducting the second 
ex ante co-ordination exercise, which 
examined national monetary policy objectives 
for 1992, the Committee 
of Governors reviewed 
forecasts of economic and 
monetary developments 
in the Community. In judging the appropriate 
thrust of monetary 
policy, particular attention was paid to the large 
margin of 
uncertainty surrounding these 
projections and 
the assumptions underpinning 
them. Economic prospects 
Forecasts presently indicate that a 
modest upturn 
in world economic growth is in prospect in 1992, which will 
provide a stimulus 
to activity within the Community. 
In the United 
States, the hesitant recovery is expected to gain momentum 
as the year progresses. Nevertheless, growth 
for the year as a whole is likely 
to be much lower than experienced in the early stages of past upswings. The Japanese economy may 
continue to slow in the early part of 
the year, although recent cuts 
in interest rates 
and budgetary measures are 
expected to limit the cyclical downturn. Activity in the EFTA countries may pick up moderately. However, given 
the close trade integration with the Community, 
the recovery expected 
in EFTA markets 
hinges in turn on a prospective 
upturn in Community markets. World trade prices are likely to remain relatively soft in 1992, leading to only small 
increases in import prices in the Community. 
Against this slowly improving international 
background, and signs 
in many countries 
that domestic conditions 
are gradually beginning to turn 
around, an upturn in economic growth 
in the Community is expected in the course of 1992. Forecasts 
produced in the autumn indicated 
that aggregate economic activity 
in the Community may 
expand by about 2% for the year as a 
whole, a rate 
of growth which would not exert pressures 
on capacity and 
labour utilisation. More 
recent data, however, suggest that 
the outcome could be less favourable. A marked reduction 
in the divergence of annual growth 
rates in the Cornunity is likely in 1992. Growth 
in western Germany will be lower, following several years 
of extraordinary buoyancy, whereas 
in the eastern 
LBnder a sharp 
turnaround is expected. On the other 
hand, most Community countries may have 
passed the 
cyclical trough, although the 
speed and strength of the recovery remain uncertain. Some improvement 
in convergence in budgetary positions 
has been assumed far 1992 on the basis 
of government intentions, although the overall fiscal imbalance 
in the Community is likely to 
remain large. A radical fiscal tightening is planned in Greece and Italy to make 
up the ground lost in 1991 and to move budgetary positions closer to a sustainable medium-term basis. In the other countries 
with either high levels 
of debt or deficits, a relatively firm fiscal stance 
is expected by the national 
authorities, although the prospective reductions 
in budgetary deficits are 
fairly small in most cases. At the Community level, the planned consolidation in the high 
deficit countries 
may be largely offset by an increase in the budget deficits in some countries with both relatively low debt and 
deficits, where 
cyclical conditions 
remain relatively weak. 
As far as labour cost 
pressures are concerned, 
some slowdown in wage growth was expected in the ex ante exercise 
for monetary 
policy co-ordination. This 
was based on the assumption that the resistance 
of firms to meet high wage 
claims would 
stiffen in an 
environment of relatively weak demand and strong competition, as well as that incomes 
policies, where applied, 
would be strengthened. Moreover, should activity 
recover as expected, 
there may also 
be a cyclical improvement 
in productivity, which would contribute to a moderation 
of unit costs. 3.2 Monetary policy prospects In the ex ante co-ordination exercise, 
the Committee of Governors considered that the 
national monetary policy intentions for the current 
year were consistent with the objective 
of reducing inflation in the Community. This assessment, however, 
was contingent upon the assumption that price 
developments would not be threatened by a number of factors outside the control of the monetary authorities. 
In this respect, not 
only may the assumptions 
about the international environment prove 
too optimistic, but there are also 
risks in a number of countries that 
plans for fiscal consolidation 
will not 
be realised, adding 
to the overall fiscal 
pressure in the Community, 
and that 
cost pressures 
will not 
abate as 
expected. If these risks 
materialise, monetary policies 
will have to be reviewed, and, 
if necessary, revised taking due 
account of their primary objective of 
promoting price stability. 
The task of monetary 
policy co-ordination will continue to prove 
difficult, as long as significant divergences persist 
between national 
economic conditions. In the last 
two years, foreign exchange market 
expectations have led to pressures 
for a marked narrowing of interest rate differentials in the Community. 
As a result, the scope 
for setting interest rates with a view to national economic conditions has 
become rather 
restricted. If the benefits 
of exchange rate stability 
are to be preserved, a monetary response 
to shocks originating 
in one country 
- especially if that country plays an important role in shaping economic 
conditions throughout the Community - would be quickly transmitted to 
the other 
Community countries. In this situation, there is a risk that 
a monetary tightening to counteract unfavourable 
price developments in some Member 
States will conflict with the desire for lower 
interest rates 
in countries with a low, or rapidly falling, 
rate of inflation and weak economic activity. However, the resulting policy 
dilemmas between domestic 
objectives and the desire to 
maintain exchange rate 
stability cannot be resolved by monetary policies alone. 
The high degree 
of integration in the Community and the interdependence between the 
national economies imposes 
constraints on all areas 
of national macro-economic management. The 
primary objective of monetary 
policy is to promote price stability 
throughout the Community and it 
is against this objective that the 
success and effectiveness of monetary policy will be judged. As 
long as strong price 
pressures continue 
in a number of countries, there will be severe limits 
to the scope for easing the overall 
monetary conditions 
in the Community. 
The difficulties 
involved in co-ordinating monetary policies in the presence of divergent national conditions, as 
well as the 
costs associated with an unbalanced policy mix, make it of the utmost importance that plans for fiscal consolidation are 
realised and that excessive wage claims are 
contained. Progress in 
these fields is 
essential not only to achieve a marked reduction 
in inflation in 1992 but also to strengthen 
the foundations underpinning 
exchange rate stability 
in the Community and 
to prepare for entry into Stage 
Three of 
EMU. 111. THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES 
OF THE NEW MONETARY INSTITUTIONS IN 
STAGES TWO AND THREE OF ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION 
In December 1991 the Heads of State 
or of Government 
agreed on the text of a Treaty 
on European Union 
which lays the legal and 
institutional foundations for 
an advancement towards a Political Union 
and the establishment 
of Economic and Monetary Union. 
The Treaty 
was signed on 7th February 
1992 and is expected 
to be ratified 
by the Member States in 
the course of 
1992. The realisation 
of EMU in accordance with the new Treaty will 
have a significant impact 
on all aspects of 
economic management 
in the Community. Essential elements of economic union will be economic 
policy co-ordination and rules 
aimed at the avoidance of excessive budget deficits. However, the 
consequences of the realisation of EMU will be most profound in the field of monetary 
policy. Possibly soon after end-1996 
- if the necessary conditions for entering Stage 
Three of 
EMU are found 
to have been met - but at the latest on 1st January 1999, the responsibility for 
monetary policy in the participating 
Member States 
will be transferred 
from the national level to 
the European 
System of Central Banks 
(ESCB). In order to ensure that 
the groundwork 
for the unprecedented move to a single, centrally decided monetary 
policy is laid, 
a European Monetary Institute 
(EMI) will be set up at the start of 
Stage Two 
on 1st January 1994. 
The EMI, which will be liquidated on the establishment 
of the ECB, will not 
only strengthen further 
the co-ordination of national monetary policies 
but will also 
prepare the necessary 
regulatory, organisational 
and logistical framework for the 
ESCB to perform its 
tasks. The Statutes 
of these two institutions 
(which are reproduced 
in Annexes I11 and IV) closely reflect the proposals 
made by the Committee of Governors as its contribution to 
the preparatory work for the Treaty on European Union. 1. THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF CENTRAL BANKS Article 1091(4) of the new Treaty states 
that: "At the starting 
date of the 
third stage, the Council shall, acting 
with the unanimity 
of the Member States without 
a derogation, on a proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting 
the ECB, adopt 
the conversion rates 
at which 
their currencies shall 
be irrevocably fixed and at which 
irrevocably fixed 
rate the ECU shall be substituted for these 
currencies, and the ECU will 
become a currency 
in its own right. This measure shall by itself not modify the external value of the 
ECU. The Council 
shall, acting according to the same procedure, also 
take the other 
measures necessary for the 
rapid introduction of the 
ECU as the single currency 
of those Member 
Statesn. The irrevocable fixing 
of exchange rates rules out 
any possibility of participating 
countries continuing to pursue independent monetary policies. Monetary Union thus implies the loss of monetary policy autonomy at the 
level of the national central 
banks and the adoption of a single monetary 
policy which, in 
accordance with the Treaty, will 
be defined and implemented 
jointly in the framework of the 
ESCB. The ESCB will operate in accordance with the provisions 
of the Treaty 
and of 
its Statute (see Annex 111). 1.1 Objectives of 
the ESCB 
The transfer 
of national decision-making power 
over monetary 
policy underscores the necessity for a clear consensus on the objectives, tasks, and operational features 
of the System. Building 
on the firmly 
shared conviction that 
price stability 
is a precondition 
for sustainable economic growth, the principal task 
of the ESCB is stated unequivocally: 
"the primary objective of the ESCB shall 
be to maintain price stabilityn. This should not be misinterpreted as 
implying that 
monetary policy will be conducted single-mindedly, 
with no regard to the 
other objectives 
of economic policy, as the Statute also requires 
the ESCB 
"to support the general economic policies 
in the Communityn, providing this takes 
place "without prejudice to the objective 
of price stabilityn. 1.2 Organisational features 
of the 
ESCB The organisational 
structure has 
been designed 
to ensure 
an effective achievement 
of the primary objective. The ESCB will consist of a new central institution, the European 
Central Bank (ECB) and the 
national central banks, which will be governed by a common set 
of rules. For the 
System to operate efficiently and coherently, the Member States 
are obliged to ensure 
that national legislation, 
including the statutes 
of each national central 
bank, are 
compatible with the Treaty and the Statute 
of the ECB. The System will be governed 
by the decision-making bodies of the ECB, the Governing Council 
and the Executive Board. The Governing Council 
will be the supreme decision-making 
body on all matters 
relating to the ESCB's tasks and operations. 
It will comprise the President, 
Vice-President, the other 
four members of the Executive Board and the Governors of the national central 
banks. In turn the Executive Board will be entrusted with the day-to-day implementation 
of monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines and decisions laid 
down by the Governing Council. To the extent deemed 
possible and 
appropriate, the ECB shall have 
recourse to the national central 
banks to 
carry out these 
operations. This structure meets 
two essential 
requirements. On the one hand, it allows monetary 
policy decisions 
to be placed firmly in the hands 
of the central decision-making 
body. On the other hand, it 
offers the 
possibility of executing policy decisions through the national central 
banks . 1.3 Independence and 
democratic accountability of the 
System In order for 
the System 
to maintain 
price stability it is 
important that 
the decision-making authorities 
shall not 
be influenced 
by considerations which would 
conflict with this aim. 
In consequence the Statute states 
that the 
ECB, the national central 
banks and any member 
of their decision-making 
bodies shall act 
without receiving instructions from 
political authorities. 
The favourable experience 
with independent monetary authorities in a number of countries 
is particularly relevant for 
a plural 
Community society where 
competing interests 
may tend to give greater 
thought to short-term considerations and thus lead 
to pressures in favour of a monetary policy stance which would not always 
be compatible with price stability in the longer 
run. The Statute contains 
a number 
of provisions to give 
practical effect to the principle of independence. 
Firstly, it ensures that members 
of the decision-making 
bodies can exercise their 
functions under 
assured tenure. Secondly, the functional, operational and 
financial provisions guarantee the economic independence 
of the System. Finally, the 
principle of "one person, one 
vote" in the Governing Council also constitutes 
an element of independence, 
since it reflects the 
consensus that members act 
on behalf of the System 
rather than 
as representatives of the Member 
States. While independence is 
considered to be an essential prerequisite 
for the fulfilment 
of the 
System's tasks, it is also fully recognised 
in the Statute that there must 
be democratic legitimacy 
and accountability. The Statute, 
which as part of 
the Treaty on European Union will 
have to be ratified by the Member States, 
clearly defines the powers entrusted 
to the Governing Council and 
the Executive 
Board, and 
the scope of 
their responsibilities. In addition, the President, Vice-President and 
other members of 
the Executive Board are appointed 
by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the level of the 
Heads of State 
or Government on a recommendation from 
the Council 
(of Ministers of Finance and Economic Affairs 
- the ECOFIN Council) after 
consulting the European 
Parliament and the Governing 
Council. The central 
bank Governors continue to be appointed by the competent 
national authorities, 
but the 
term of office of a 
Governor of a 
national central bank shall 
be no less than five year S. Transparency is 
an important element of democratic 
accountability. In addition to regular 
reports on the operation 
of the System and 
the publication of weekly consolidated financial statements, 
the ECB will present annual reports to the 
European Council, 
the ECOFIN Council, the Commission and the 
European Parliament. Transparency is 
further enhanced by the provision that the President of the ECOFIN Council 
and a member of the 
Commission may participate, without having the 
right to vote, in meetings of the Governing 
Council. 1.4 Operational and 
functional aspects 
To ensure 
the efficient 
operation of monetary policy, 
the Statute 
provides the System 
with the powers to select and 
utilise the necessary instruments and techniques 
of monetary 
control. The relevant 
provisions have been drafted 
with due regard to the evolutionary 
nature of financial markets and 
will allow the System to 
respond flexibly to changing market conditions. To avoid any obligation for 
the System which would render it extremely difficult, 
if not impossible, to attain 
price stability, the Statute denies the ECB 
and the national central 
banks the possibility 
of providing overdrafts or other types of 
credit facilities to 
public entities. In the field of exchange rate policy, the ESCB 
has been 
entrusted with the task of holding 
and managing the official reserves of the Member 
States and of 
conducting foreign 
exchange operations. 
This task must be exercised consistently with the provisions of the 
Treaty. The ECOFIN 
Council may "conclude formal 
agreements on an exchange rate system for 
the ECU vis-a-vis non-Community currencies", 
or, in the absence 
of such a system, may "formulate general 
orientations for exchange rate 
policyn. A number of safeguards 
have been introduced 
to avoid possible conflicts 
between measures taken 
or views 
expressed by 
the ECOFIN Council and the operation of monetary 
policy by the ESCB. In particular, when concluding formal exchange rate "agreements" 
the Council must consult 
the ECB "in an endeavour to reach a consensus consistent 
with the objective of price stability', while "general orientations" for exchange rate 
policy "shall be without prejudice to the 
primary objective 
of the ESCB to maintain 
price stabilityn. The System has also 
been assigned the 
task of 
promoting the 
smooth operation 
of payment 
systems. In relation to the 
wider goal of preserving financial stability in the Community, the ESCB "shall contribute 
as necessary to the smooth conduct 
of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities relating to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the stability 
of the financial systemn. Furthermore, 
the ECB has 
been provided with an advisory role 
on any proposed 
Community or national 
legislation within its 
field of competence. 
1.5 Transitional aspects 
The ESCB 
will be established immediately 
after the date has 
been set for the 
start of 
Stage Three, 
or by mid-1998 at 
the latest. 
In the event that some Member 
States do not 
fulfil the conditions 
for moving 
to the final stage 
they will be granted a 
derogation; protocols relating to 
Denmark and 
the United Kingdom make 
similar provisions 
should a 
decision be taken by either of these countries 
not to enter the final stage 
of EMU. Participation in the ESCB of 
the national central 
banks of 
Member States 
with a derogation is 
governed by special provisions 
in the Statute. These 
provisions recognise 
that monetary policy in these Member States remains 
a national responsibility 
and, furthermore, that these central 
banks should not participate in the formulation and execution of the single monetary policy pursued 
by the ESCB. However, to ensure that co-operation 
with these central banks is maintained, particularly in view of the need to 
prepare for their 
eventual full integration into 
the System, a further decision-making body of the 
ECB will 
be created, the General Council. This Council will be composed of the President and 
Vice-President of the 
ECB, and the Governors 
of the national central banks of all the Member States, 
and will perform consultative 
and advisory functions. 
It will 
cease to exist when all Member 
States of the Community 
have entered the final stage of EMU. 2. THE EUROPEAN MONETARY INSTITUTE 
The EM1 will be instrumental in facilitating and organising the transition to the single 
monetary policy which will 
come into effect in one step at the start 
of Stage Three. 
In preparing the 
transfer of monetary policy competence to the 
future ESCB, two aspects have to 
be taken into consideration. On the one hand, the responsibility for monetary 
policy will remain with the national authorities 
of the 
individual Member 
States, until the start of Stage 
Three, and, 
on the other, at 
the latest at that 
moment the conditions 
and operating procedures required 
for the conduct of the single monetary 
policy will have to be firmly in place. For this reason a 
two-pronged strategy will be followed in the transitional 
phase: national monetary policies will be co-ordinated 
even more 
closely than in the past and, at 
the same time, a wide range of preparatory work will 
be undertaken in order to enable 
the future 
ESCB to perform its tasks. Obviously, the changes in monetary policy operations which will 
become applicable in Stage Three must not infringe on national monetary 
policy autonomy during the transitional phase. However, the need 
to reach a state of readiness on the eve of Stage Three also implies 
that preparations will have 
to be made for the necessary adaptations 
to instruments and procedures currently 
used at national levels 
. 2.1 The tasks 
of the EM1 The importance 
of guiding monetary 
developments towards the introduction of the single monetary 
policy is clearly recognised 
in the three basic 
tasks assigned to 
the EM1 (see Annex 
IV). Firstly, the EM1 is entrusted with strengthening the co-ordination of national monetary policies with a view to ensuring price stability. 
This primary task, together with certain advisory functions, implies 
the assumption of the 
role currently 
performed by the Committee of Governors, which will 
be dissolved on the establishment of the EMI. 
In addition, the EM1 will have to facilitate the use of the private 
ECU and oversee its development, 
including the smooth functioning 
of the ECU clearing system. 
Secondly, the EM1 is called upon to make the preparation required for the conduct 
of a single monetary 
policy in. Stage Three and for 
the establishment of the ESCB 
and the 
creation of a single currency. 
To this end, the EM1 will have to 
specify at the latest by the end of 
1996 the regulatory, organisation and 
logistical framework for the ESCB. This will 
include not only the 
preparation of the 
necessary monetary 
policy instruments and procedures, 
but also cover such areas 
as the harmonisation 
of rules and practices governing the 
collection, compilation 
and distribution of the 
relevant monetary and financial statistics, 
the promotion of 
efficient EC cross-border 
payments and the supervision 
of the 
technical preparation 
of ECU bank notes. Moreover, the 
EM1 may be given additional tasks 
relating to the 
preparation of Stage Three. Thirdly, the EM1 has some operational 
tasks which partly arise from the transfer of 
the functions of the 
present European 
Monetary Co-operation Fund, which will cease to exist at the start 
of Stage Two. Such tasks include 
in particular the 
issuance of official ECUs for the purpose of implementing 
the EMS Agreement. In addition, the EM1 is entitled to hold and manage foreign 
exchange reserves 
as an agent for, and at the request of, Community central 
banks. This latter function, however, is 
subject to rules to 
be adopted by the EM1 which shall ensure that 
the EMI's transactions with these reserves 
do not interfere 
with the monetary and exchange rate 
policies of 
the national authorities and are consistent with 
the objectives of the EM1 and the proper 
functioning of the ERM. 2.2 The structure of the 
EM1 The EM1 will be a Community 
body which will have its 
own legal personality. It will be governed by the Council 
of the 
EM1 which, in addition to the Governors 
of the national central banks, 
will include a President appointed 
by common accord of the Governments of the Member States at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government on a recommendation from the Committee of Governors from 
among persons 
of recognised 
standing and professional 
expertise in monetary or banking matters. 
The President 
will prepare and chair the meetings 
of the Council 
of the EMI, 
present the 
views of the 
EM1 externally and 
be responsible for the day-to-day management. A Vice-President, chosen 
from among the 
central bank governors, will perform these duties in the absence of the President. 
The EM1 will be an independent body. The Council of 
the EM1 may not seek or 
take any 
instructions from 
Community institutions or bodies 
or Governments of Member States. However, since the responsibility 
for monetary policy remains with the national authorities, it is also 
recognised that 
the Governors 
are the representatives 
of their 
institutions. Nevertheless, with 
respect to their 
activities on the Council 
of the EMI, they will act according 
to their 
own responsibilities. During Stage Two, each Member State, 
as appropriate, will have 
to' start the process leading to the 
independence of its central bank, 
completing it at 
the latest by the time of 
the establishment of the 
ESCB. The EM1 will have its own financial 
resources to cover its administrative expenditure. These resources 
will be paid up at the establishment of the 
EM1 in the form of contributions shared 
by the Community central 
banks in accordance with a key reflecting in equal proportions their countries' 
GDP and population. The existence of the EM1 will end with the establishment of the ECB and 
it will go 
into liquidation 
in accordance with the rules 
laid down in the EM1 Statute. 2.3 Preparatory work in the monetary field 
for the move to 
Stages Two and Three 
of EMU The Treaty 
on European Union sets a very 
ambitious agenda for 
the institutional, organisation 
and legal measures 
which at the latest 
will have to 
be specified 
by the end of 
1996, i.e. within less than five 
years. While the preparatory measures for 
the conduct of a single 
monetary policy are explicitly assigned 
to the 
EMI, the complexity of the issues 
involved and the time needed to resolve 
them makes 
it prudent not to await 
the establishment of 
the EM1 on 1st January 1994 but rather to 
commence preparatory work in some of 
the relevant areas as soon as 
possible. For this reason, the Committee 
of Governors 
has not only embarked on the work required for setting 
up the EMI, but has also begun to take the 
first preparatory steps 
for laying the 
foundation for 
the conduct of the single 
monetary policy. PART B THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCm OF THE COMTTEE OF GOVERNORS 
I. THE CREATION 
AND THE EVOLVING ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS The Committee of Governors was created in 1964 by the Council 
Decision (64/300/EEC) of 8th May 1964 
on co-operation between the 
Central Banks of the Member States of the European 
Economic Community. The initial tasks of the Committee 
were: "to hold consultations concerning the general 
principles and the 
broad lines of policy of the Central Banks, in particular as regards credit and money and foreign exchange 
markets, and to 
exchange information 
at regular intervals about the most important measures that fall 
within the competence of the Central Banks, and to examine these While these original 
tasks reflected the modest ambitions 
prevailing at 
that time 
with respect to monetary co-operation within 
the Community, the Committee's role was 
increased at 
the end of 
the 1960s as 
monetary integration 
progressed and plans 
to create an economic and monetary union were first launched. 1 In 1971, the Community Central Banks 
were invited to co-ordinate their policies in monetary and credit matters within the Committee 
of ~overnors.' The Committee also 
became a vehicle for central 
bank co-operation in the balance-of-payments and exchange rate 
fields. In 1970, the Community central 
banks set 
up the system of short-term monetary a multilateral credit 
system giving 
access to short-term funds in case of a temporary balance-of-payments deficit 
due to unforeseen difficulties or 
to conjunctural divergences. Another 
step on the road towards monetary integration 
was made in 1972 with 
the establishment of the 1 See the report to the Council and the Commission 
on the realisation by stages of economic and monetary 
union in the Community (Werner Report), dated 8th October 1970. 
2 See Council Decision 
(71/142/EEC) of 22nd March 1971 
on the strengthening of co-operation between the 
central banks of the Member 
States of the European Economic Community. 
3 See 
the Agreement of 9th February 1970 setting up a system 
of short-term monetary support among 
the central banks of the Member 
States of the European 
Economic Community. 
system for the narrowing of the margins of fluctuation between 
the currencies of the 
Member States 
(the so-called :snaken). 4 At the end of the 1970s the Committee's 
tasks were extended further when the process of economic 
and monetary integration 
was revived. In March 1979, the European Monetary System (EMS) 
was set up to supersede 
the "snaken. The operational procedures were laid down in the central bank Agreement of 13th March 
1979,~ which since then has 
served as the institutional framework for central 
bank co-operation. In 1986, when 
the EC Treaty was revised in the context of the Single European 
Act, advisory status with respect to institutional 
changes in the monetary area 
was conferred upon the Committee 
of Governors (Article 
102 A). Additional advisory tasks 
were assigned to the 
Committee in 1988 with 
reference to 
the abolition of restrictions on capital movements under Article 
67 of the Treaty. Most recently, 
the Committee's responsibilities were increased in the context of Stage One 
of EMU. The mandate of the Committee 
was revised by the Council 
in March 1990 
and is reproduced 
in Annex I. The activities of the Committee under this 
revised mandate were described in Chapter I. 4 Agreement of 10th April 1972 between the central 
banks of the 
Member States of the Community 
on the narrowing of the margins of fluctuation between Community currencies. 5 Agreement of 13th March 
1979 between 
the central banks 
of the Member 
States of the European 
Economic Community laying 
down the operating 
procedures for the European 
Monetary System. The growing role 
of the Committee of 
Governors and 
the assignment of new tasks have 
necessitated changes 
in the Committee's organisational structure from time to 
time. The present structure was set up at the 
start of Stage One of 
EMU in July 1990 (see Chart 10). The Committee 
of Governors is composed of the Governors 
of the 
central banks of 
the Member 
States of the 
Community and the Director 
General of the 
Luxembourg Monetary Institute. A 
member of the 
Commission is regularly invited to the meetings of the Committee. 
In accordance with the mandate, "the members of the Committee, who are the representatives 
of their institutions, 
shall act, with 
respect to their activities on the Committee, according to 
their own responsibilities and having due 
regard to Community objectives". 
The Committee of Governors meets 
at regular intervals, normally 
ten times a year. 
The proceedings of the meetings are confidential; 
however, the Committee may 
authorise its Chairman to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public. In the performance of 
its duties, 
the Committee 
enjoys autonomy. It adopts its own 
rules of procedure 
and, unlike other Committees created under Community 
charter, has its 
own organisational structure. The Chairman is 
elected by the Committee from among its 
members. The present Chairman is 
Dr. E. Hoffmeyer, Governor 
of Danmarks Nationalbank; he succeeded Herr K.O. Pbhl, who relinquished the chairmanship when resigning as President of 
the Deutsche Bundesbank at 
the end of July 1991. The Committee 
of Governors 
is assisted 
by the Committee 
of Alternates, three sub-committees, 
the Secretariat 
and the Economic Unit. 
In addition, for 
specialised tasks, the Committee at times establishes ad hoc working groups. The Chairmen 
of the sub-committees and 
working groups 
are appointed by the Committee of 
Governors, which also appoints its 
Secretary General and the other professional members 
of the Secretariat 
and Economic Unit. The Commission is 
in general represented 
on the various sub-committees and 
ad hoc working groups. The Committee of Alternates 
is composed of senior 
representatives of Community central 
banks who have been 
appointed by the Governors as 
their alternates in the Committee of Governors. The main task of the Committee of Alternates is to 
prepare the 
meetings of 
the Committee of CHART 10: ORGANISATION CHART FOR THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS 
OF THE EEC MEMBER STATES (APRIL 1992) 
COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS Chairman: E. Hoffmeyer (1) SECRETARIAT & ECONOMIC UNIT Secretary General : COMMITTEE OF ALTERNATES l Chairman: FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
POLICY SUB-COMMI TTEE Chainnan: F. Saccmnni (2) MONETARY POLICY SUB-COMMI TTEE Chainnan: A. Borges (3) I Chairman: I I Chairman: I BANKING SUPERVISORY 
SUB-COMMITTEE I I AD HOC WORKING GROUP 
1 ON EC PAYMENT SYSTEMS 
1 Replaced K.O. Pohl with effect from 1st Au st 1991. Replaced H. Dalgaard with effect 
fm 1st %ember 1991. 1:) Replaced R. Raymond with effect fm 1st September 1991. B. @inn T . Padoa-Sch ioppa L --------------- 1 Governors on the basis 
of work carried out 
by the sub-committees, 
the Secretariat and the 
Economic Unit. 
The Committee 
of Alternates normally 
meets on the eve of the Committee 
of Governors' meetings. 
The Commission is, as a general rule, invited to 
send a senior official 
as a representative to the meetings of the Alternates. 
The Foreinn Exchange Policy 
Sub-Committee is 
composed of central bank officials who are involvea in the formulation and implementation 
of national foreign exchange policies. The Sub-Committee 
prepares the 
Governors' discussions on all foreign 
exchange issues. 
This preparatory work includes the monthly 
monitoring of exchange rate and 
monetary developments, the production of regular reports on the functioning of 
the EMS and 
developments in the use 
of the private 
ECU, as well 
as ad hoc studies on special topics. The Sub-Committee 
also arranges for the 
regular exchange of information 
with non-Community central 
banks in the framework 
of the "concertation proceduren. This procedure provides 
for the daily 
exchange of data on exchange market developments, intervention 
and other 
official foreign exchange transactions, 
and for monthly meetings 
of the "Concertation Group", which is composed of the 
members of the Sub-Committee and of the Heads of the Foreign Departments of the central 
banks of the United States, Canada, 
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, 
Austria and Switzerland. The Monetary Policy Sub-Committee is 
composed of central bank officials who are involved in the formulation and implementation 
of monetary policies 
in their national institutions. The duties of 
the Sub-Committee include the 
preparation of the regular examinations 
of monetary policy intentions and their 
implementation as well as the analysis of issues relating 
to the conduct of monetary policies 
in the various stages of EMU. In this context, for instance, 
it holds consultations 
on changes in the definition 
of monetary and credit aggregates 
in the Community and reviews regularly 
developments in the field of monetary policy instruments. 
The Sub-Committee also 
prepares the Governors' annual 
assessments of the Member States' budgetary policies 
and debt 
management. The Bankinn Supervisory Sub-Committee is composed of a senior representative of each Community 
central bank. In the cases where EEC central 
banks do not 
have legal responsibility 
for banking supervision, a senior representative of the respective banking supervisory authority 
- namely, the Belgian 
Banking and Finance Commission, the Danish 
Finanstilsynet and 
the German Bundesaufsichtsamt fur das Kreditwesen 
- also participates in the meetings. The principal task 
of the Sub-Committee 
is to hold 
regular consultations on matters of common interest 
relating to the policies 
and practices of banking 
supervision in the Member States, 
particularly where there is 
a Community-wide dimension. In order to ensure 
effective co-ordination with other supervisory bodies and to avoid unnecessary 
duplication in addressing issues of common interest, the Committee 
liaises with the Basle 
Committee on Banking Supervision, the Banking Advisory 
Committee, and the 
Financial Institutions and Company 
Law Directorate of the Commission of the European 
Communities. For the execution 
of special tasks, the Committee of Governors has, at times, created 
ad hoc working groups. At present, issues of 
direct concern for central 
banks in the field of payment systems 
are being studied 
by such a special working 
group. The Secretariat 
of the Committee of 
Governors provides all secretarial services to the 
Committee itself, the Committee of Alternates and the 
sub-committees, as well 
as to the Board 
of Governors of the European Monetary Co-operation 
Fund (EMCF). In July 1990, an Economic Unit was added to the 
existing Secretariat. The principal task of 
the Economic Unit is to provide 
analytical support 
to the 
work of the Committee 
of Governors. The Secretariat and 
the Economic Unit, which are both headed 
by the Secretary 
General of the Committee, are 
independent in their work from 
any other national 
or international 
institution or government. 
The staff is 
composed of nationals from 
the Member States 
who are in most cases 
seconded from national central 
banks or international institutions. 
The number 
of staff is currently 
nineteen. The Secretariat 
is based within the 
Bank for International 
Settlements, which also provides technical 
and logistical 
support to the Committee of Governors. The expenses incurred 
by the Committee of 
Governors are shared out among 
the central 
banks in proportion to their quotas in the short-term monetary 
support facility. 
CURRENCIES ECU BEF DKK DEM GRD ESP FRF IEP 
ITL NLG PTE GBP USD JPY Belgium Denmark Germany Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom United States of America Japan European Currency Unit 
BelgianlLuxembourg franc Danish krone Deutsche Mark 
Greek drachma 
Spanish peseta French franc Irish pound Italian lira Dutch guilder Portuguese escudo Pound sterling 
US dollar Japanese yen OTHER ABBREVIATIONS BIS Bank for International Settlements 
EEC European Economic Community 
(12 Member States) 
ERM Exchange Rate Mechanism (all EEC Member 
States participate except 
Greece and Portugal) Narrow ERM Narrow band of the ERM (all EEC Member 
States participate except Greece, Spain, 
Portugal and the 
United Kingdom) GDP Gross Domestic 
Product GNP Gross National Product 
OECD Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development 1 Figures for 
the EEC, the ERM, and the ERM narrow band are weighted averages. 2 In accordance with Community practice, countries 
are listed in the Report using 
the alphabetical order of the national languages, as shown above. ANNEXES ANNEX I : Revised mandate of the Committee of Governors ANNEX 11 : Harmonisation of broad monetary aggregates ANNEX 111 : The Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank ANNEX IV : The Statute of the European Monetary Institute Annex I COUNCIL DECISION 
of 12th March 1990 amendin~ Council Decision 
6413001EEC on co-operation between the 
central banks of the Member States 
of the European Economic 
Community THE COUNCIL 
OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing 
the European Economic Community, and in particular to Article 105(1) and to the 
first indent 
of Article 145 thereof, Having regard to the 
recommendation from 
the Commission, Having regard to the 
opinion of the 
European parliamentL, 2Having regard to the 
opinion of the Economic 
and Social Committee , Whereas the European Council, at its meeting 
in Madrid on 26th and 27th June 1989, decided that 
the first stage 
of the 
realisation of economic and monetary union should begin on 1st 
July 1990; Whereas Article 
102a of the Treaty together 
with the realisation of the first stage of the economic and monetary union call for 
an increased degree of convergence in economic performance towards 
non-inflationary growth and of economic and social cohesion 
between the Member States; Whereas greater convergence 
should be promoted with a view to achieving domestic 
price stability, which is at the same time 
a necessary condition for 
stable exchange rates, in accordance with the requirements of the European Monetary System; Whereas the realisation of the first stage of economic and monetary union will 
focus on completing the internal market 
and in particular on removing all 
obstacles to financial integration, on strengthening the process of co-ordination of monetary policies, on 
intensifying co-operation between central banks on other matters 
falling within their competence 
and whereas, in this connection, consideration should be given to extending the 
scope of the central banks' autonomy; Whereas arrangements 
for the formulation of monetary policy within the framework 
of an economic and monetary union 
should provide 
for adequate autonomy 
for the institutions and for commitment to 
price stability, which 
is essential 
to the success of that union; Whereas, in view of the 
objective of the progressive realisation of economic and monetary union, the tasks should 
be extended and the tasks 
1 Official Journal 
of the European Communities 
No. C68, 19.3.1990. 2 Official Journal 
of the European Communities 
No. C56, 7.3.1990, p.47. Annex I and role 
of the Committee 
of Governors 
of the Central Banks of the Member States of the European 
Economic Community should 
be reinforced; 3 Whereas Decision 
6413001EEC should be amended in consequence, HAS DECIDED AS 
FOLLOWS: Sole Article Decision 64/300/EEC is amended as follows: 1. Article 2 is replaced by the following: "Article 2 The Committee 
shall be composed of the 
Governors of the Central Banks of the 
Member States and 
the Director-General of the Luxembourg 
Monetary Institute. If they are unable to attend, 
they may nominate another 
representative of 
their institution. 
The Commission shall, 
as a 
general rule, 
be invited to send one 
of its members 
as a representative 
to the 
meetings of the Committee. 
The Committee may, furthermore, if it considers it necessary, 
invite qualified 
persons to attend and in particular the chairman 
of the monetary committee." 2. The following 
Article is inserted: "Article 2a The chairman 
of the Committee shall be invited to participate in 
the meetings of the 
Council of Ministers 
whenever it deals with-issues involving the tasks of the Committee of Governors." 
3. Article 3 is replaced by the following: 
"Article 3 The tasks 
of the Committee shall 
be: (1) to hold consultations concerning 
the general principles and the broad lines of monetary policy, in particular as regards 
credit, the money and foreign 
exchange markets as 
well as issues falling within the competence of the central banks and affecting 
the stability of financial 
institutions and 
markets; (2) to exchange information 
regularly about the most important measures that fall within 
the competence of 
the central banks, 
and to 
examine those measures. The 
Committee shall normally 
be consulted before the 
national authorities 
take decisions on the course of monetary 
policy, such as the setting 
of annual money supply and credit targets; 
(3) to promote the 
co-ordination of the 
monetary policies 
of the Member States 
with the aim of achieving price stability as a 
necessary condition for 
the proper functioning of 
the European 
Monetary System 
and the realisation 
of its objective 
of monetary stability; 3 Official Journal 
of the 
European Communities No. 77, 21.5.1964, p.1206/64. Annex I (4) to formulate opinions 
on the overall orientation 
of monetary and exchange rate 
policy as well as on the respective measures 
introduced in individual Member States; (5) to express opinions 
to individual governments and 
the Council of Ministers on policies which might affect the internal 
and external monetary 
situation in the Community 
and, in particular, the functioning 
of the 
European Monetary System. In carrying out its tasks, the Committee shall 
keep under review 
the monetary situation 
and pr6qyscts both inside and outside the Community. The Committee shall prepare an annual report on its activities and on the monetary 
and financial conditions 
in the Community, which 
will be transmitted to the 
European Parliament, 
the Council of Ministers, and the European Council. The President of the Committee may 
be invited to appear before the European Parliament on 
this occasion and also before the 
competent committee 
of the European Parliament 
where the circumstances 
so justify. The Committee 
may authorise its chairman 
to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public." 4. The following Article is 
inserted: "Article 3a The members 
of the Committee, who are the representatives of their institutions, shall act, with respect to their 
activities on the Committee, according to their 
own responsibilities and having due 
regard to Community objectives." 5. Article 5 is replaced by the following: "Article 5 The Committee shall 
adopt its own rules of procedure. It may set up sub-committees and provide its 
own secretariat 
and research services." 
Done at Brussels, 12th March 1990. For the Council 
The President 
A. REYNOLDS Annex I1 Over the last eighteen months, 
Community. central banks and the Economic Unit have worked 
together to improve the consistency of 
national definitions of money stocks. The project has initially 
concentrated on 
broad money aggregates, which 
are used as intermediate monetary 
targets or as a key monetary indicator in most Community countries. 
Narrow monetary aggregates may 
be examined more closely at a later 
stage; however, 
a preliminary survey 
has indicated that their definitions 
are already quite 
similar across Community countries. 
The starting point 
for the harmonisation project was to 
select the national measures 
of broad money which seemed to be closest in statistical content. Even though 
their names vary the 
definitions proved to be already reasonably 
similar in most 
cases.' In addition to assets 
included in narrow aggregates (typically those 
used as an immediate means of payment), 
broad aggregates generally incorporate other 
"liquid assets", which are close 
substitutes for a means of payment either because 
they have a short 
maturity or because 
they can be easily transformed 
into a means of payment at little cost 
or risk of loss. Certain discrepancies were identified, however, 
in the asset composition and 
in other aspects, such as 
currency denomination, of the 
national definitions. Nevertheless, 
given the differences in financial structure and behaviour across Community countries, it was 
felt that full 
harmonisation, in the sense of a mechanical 
elimination of all statistical discrepancies, would have 
been inappropriate. 
Rather, the characteristics 
of assets which are, 
or could be, included 
in national definitions 
had to be examined carefully 
on a case-by-case basis in order to assess their 
relevance in practice. Furthermore, due 
regard had 
to be paid to the need 
to preserve the economic 
properties which render monetary 
aggregates useful in the conduct of monetary policy. Among these 
properties, priority was given to the stability of the link between money and 
the final 
goals. The 
importance of controllability 
was less clear, since the process of European financial integration, 
together with the objective of 
exchange rate 
stability, is gradually weakening the scope to control monetary growth at 
the national level. The economic properties 
of the broad 
aggregates chosen as a starting point 
for the harmonisation 
exercise served as benchmarks when assessing alternative 
statistical definitions. Econometric analysis showed that for most 
countries the 
selected definitions have exhibited a fairly 
stable and predictable link 
with nominal income and interest rates over 
the 1980s. Following economic and statistical analysis of 
possible alternatives for national aggregates, 
recommendations for changes 
in definition have been 
put forward. In some cases, they are being embodied 
in official national definitions; 
in others, for 
the time 
being, they will only be implemented for the internal purposes of the 
Committee of Governors, as further analysis 
may be needed. Once 
the proposed changes have been implemented, 
the definitions of 
broad money will 
be sufficiently similar across the Community 
- in terms of asset composition, 
currency denomination and sectoral definition - to facilitate both 
the direct 1 Aggregates selected were M3 in Belgium, Germany, France, 
the Netherlands, Greece and Ireland, 
M2 in Italy, Denmark and Luxembourg, 
M4 in the United Kingdom, ALP 
in Spain, and L- in Portugal. Annex I1 comparison of developments in national money 
stocks and the aggregation of the latter into monetary 
indicators for the area as 
a whole. After harmonisation, 
the aggregates under review 
display the following characteristics: (a) Asset composition 
The aggregates include 
the following monetary 
assets: notes, coins and sight deposits, as well as 
savings deposits, deposits 
at notice and fixed-time deposits, 
except those above certain maturity thresholds in 
a few countries. This latter difference is relatively 
minor in practice since, in the countries where thresholds are not used, assets are 
mostly short-term, and, where 
thresholds are used, 
the excluded 
assets have 
obvious non-monetary features, 
such as a 
very long maturity or 
a high cost of conversion into 
a liquid 
asset. Criteria based on the notions 
of liquidity and 
substitutability with other assets were applied to assess the desirability of including such 
assets as negotiable certificates, 
repurchase agreements 
between banks and 
non-banks (irrespective 
of the asset used as 
collateral), short-term bank bonds, and non-negotiable certificates. (b) Currency 
denomination and cross-border holdings 
To comply with the current practice of 
most Community countries, 
monetary aggregates 
should include 
assets, held by domestic residents, 
independently of whether they 
are denominated in domestic or foreign currency. Data on holdings of those assets are readily available 
when they are the liabilities 
of domestically-located intermediaries. 
However, given 
the increasing importance 
of cross-border 
holdings by non-financial residents, "extended national measures"which include these holdings will 
be used as auxiliary indicators 
according to the availability 
of statistical information. (C) Sectoral definition As long as 
financial structures and behaviour differ, the sectoral definition of money 
"issuers" and "holders" across the Community should take country-specific 
features into account. As a result, no common 
definition of these sectors 
can be put forward. However, as 
a general principle, all monetary liabilities of 
the (domestically-located) financial 
institutions which operate as banks should be included. The resulting aggregate is taken as 
the principal monetary indicator and, 
at present, is 
termed "M3H"for the internal purposes of the 
Committee of Governors. A 
wider concept, called internally 
"M4Hn, is also 
monitored. In addition to the instruments included in M3H, this broader 
concept consists 
of those 
liabilities of 
the non-financial sector which are highly 
substitutable for the components of 
M3H (mainly Government 
short-term paper and corporate 
commercial paper). Annex I11 TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNION AS SIGNED ON 7TH FEBRUARY 
1992 PROTOCOL ON THE 
STATUTE OF 
THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF 
CENTRAL BANKS AND OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL 
BANK THE HIGH CONTRACTING 
PARTIES, DESIRING to lay down the Statute of the European System 
of Central Banks and of the European Central 
Bank provided 
for in Article 4a of the Treaty establishing the European Community, HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, which 
shall be annexed to the Treaty establishing the European Community: 
CHAPTER I - CONSTITUTION OF THE 
ESCB ARTICLE 1 - The European System of Central Banks 
1.1 The European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the European Central Bank (ECB) shall be established in accordance with Article 4a 
of this Treaty; they shall perform 
their tasks and carry on their activities in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty 
and of this Statute. 1.2 In accordance with Article 106(1) of this Treaty, the ESCB shall be composed of the ECB and of the central 
banks of the 
Member States ("national central banks"). The 
Institut monetaire luxembourgeois will 
be the central bank of Luxembourg. CHAPTER I1 - OBJECTIVES AND TASKS OF 
THE ESCB ARTICLE 2 - Objectives In accordance with Article 105(1) of this Treaty, the primary objective of the ESCB shall 
be to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to the objective of price stability, it shall support the general economic policies in the Community with a 
view to contributing to the achievement 
of the objectives of the Community as laid down in Article 2 of this Treaty. 
The ESCB 
shall act 
in accordance with the principle of an open market economy with free competition, favouring 
an efficient allocation of resources, and in compliance with the principles 
set out in Article 3a of this Treaty. 
ARTICLE 3 - Tasks 3.1 In accordance with Article 
105(2) of this Treaty, the basic tasks to be carried out 
through the ESCB shall be: - to define 
and implement the monetary policy 
of the Community; - to conduct foreign 
exchange operations consistent 
with the provisions of Article 109 of this Treaty; - to hold and manage the official foreign reserves 
of the Member States; - to promote the smooth operation 
of payment systems. 
Annex I11 3.2 In accordance with Article 105(3) of this Treaty, the 
third indent of Article 3.1 shall be without prejudice to the holding 
and management by the governments 
of Member States 
of foreign exchange working 
balances. 3.3 In accordance with Article 105(5) of this Treaty, the 
ESCB shall contribute 
to the smooth conduct 
of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities relating to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the 
stability of 
the financial system. ARTICLE 4 - Advisory functions 
In accordance with Article 105(4) of this Treaty: 
a) the ECB shall 
be consulted: - on any proposed Community act in its fields 
of competence; - by national authorities regarding any draft legislative 
provision in its fields 
of competence, but within the limits and under the conditions set 
out by the Council in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42; b) the ECB may submit opinions 
to the appropriate Community institutions or bodies or to national authorities on matters 
in its fields 
of competence. ARTICLE 5 - Collection of statistical information 5.1 In order to 
undertake the tasks of the 
ESCB, the ECB, assisted by the national central banks, 
shall collect the 
necessary statistical 
information either 
from the competent 
national authorities 
or directly from 
economic agents. For these 
purposes it shall co-operate with the Community institutions or bodies and 
with the competent authorities 
of the 
Member States or third 
countries and with international organisations. 
5.2 The national central banks shall 
carry out, to 
the extent possible, the tasks 
described in Article 5.1. 5.3 The ECB 
shall contribute 
to the 
harmonisation, where necessary, of the rules 
and practices governing 
the collection, compilation 
and distribution of statistics 
in the areas within its fields 
of competence. 5.4 The Council, in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
Article 42, shall define 
the natural and legal persons subject to reporting requirements, the confidentiality regime and the 
appropriate provisions for enforcement. ARTICLE 6 - International co-operation 
6.1 In the field 
of international co-operation involving the 
tasks entrusted to the ESCB, the 
ECB shall 
decide how the ESCB shall 
be represented. 6.2 The ECB and, 
subject to its approval, the national central 
banks may participate in international monetary institutions. 
6.3 Articles 6.1 and 6.2 shall be without prejudice 
to Article 109(4) of this Treaty. Annex I11 CHAPTER I11 - ORGANISATION OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 7 - Independence In accordance with Article 107 of this 
Treaty, when exercising the powers 
and carrying out 
the tasks and 
duties conferred 
upon them by this Treaty 
and this Statute, neither the ECB 
nor a national central bank, 
nor any member 
of their decision-making bodies shall seek or take 
instructions from Community institutions or 
bodies, from any government 
of a Member State 
or from any other 
body. The Community institutions and bodies and 
the governments 
of the 
Member States undertake 
to respect this principle and not to 
seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the 
ECB or of 
the national central 
banks in the performance of their tasks. 
ARTICLE 8 - General principle 
The ESCB shall 
be governed by the decision-making bodies of the ECB . ARTICLE 9 - The European Central Bank 
9.1 The ECB which, 
in accordance with Article 106(2) of this 
Treaty, shall have legal 
personality, shall enjoy 
in each of 
the Member States the most 
extensive legal capacity accorded to legal 
persons under 
its law; it may, in 
particular, acquire or 
dispose of movable and immovable 
property and may 
be a party to legal proceedings. 
9.2 The ECB shall ensure 
that the 
tasks conferred upon 
the ESCB 
under Article 
105(2), (3) and (5) of this Treaty 
are implemented either by its own activities 
pursuant to this 
Statute or 
through the national central banks pursuant 
to Articles 12.1 
and 14. 9.3 In accordance with Article 106(3) of this 
Treaty, the decision-making bodies of 
the ECB 
shall be the Governing 
Council and the 
Executive Board. ARTICLE 10 - The Governing Council 
10.1 In accordance with 
Article 109a(l) of this 
Treaty, the Governing Council shall 
comprise the members of 
the Executive Board of the ECB and the Governors of the national central banks. 10.2 Subject to 
Article 10.3, only 
members of the 
Governing Council 
present in person shall have 
the right to 
vote. By way of derogation from 
this rule, the Rules 
of Procedure referred 
to in Article 12.3 
may lay down that members of the Governing 
Council may cast their 
vote by means of teleconferencing. These rules 
shall also provide that a 
member of the Governing Council 
who is prevented from voting for a prolonged 
period may appoint an alternate as a member 
of the Governing Council. Subject to 
Articles 10.3 and 11.3, each member 
of the 
Governing Council shall have one 
vote. Save as otherwise provided 
for in this Statute, the Governing Council 
shall act by a simple majority. 
In the event 
of a 
tie, the President 
shall have the casting vote. In order for 
the Governing Council to vote, there shall 
be a quorum of two-thirds 
of the members. If the quorum is not 
met, the President may convene an extraordinary meeting at which decisions may 
be taken without 
regard to the quorum. 
Annex I11 10.3 For any 
decisions to be taken under Articles 
28, 29, 30, 32, 33 and 51, the votes 
in the Governing Council shall be weighted according to 
the national central 
banks' shares in the subscribed 
capital of the ECB. The weights 
of the votes 
of the members of 
the Executive 
Board shall be zero. A decision requiring a qualified 
majority shall 
be adopted if the votes cast in favour represent at least two-thirds of the subscribed capital of the ECB 
and represent at least half 
of the shareholders. If a Governor is unable to 
be present, he may nominate an alternate to cast his weighted vote. 10.4 The proceedings 
of the meetings 
shall be 
confidential. The Governing Council may decide 
to make the outcome of its deliberations 
public. 10.5 The Governing 
Council shall meet at least ten times a year. 
ARTICLE 11 - The Executive Board 11.1 In accordance with Article 109a(2)(a) of this 
Treaty, the Executive Board shall comprise 
the President, the Vice-President 
and four other members. The members 
shall perform their 
duties on a full-time basis. No 
member shall engage 
in any occupation, whether gainful 
or not, unless exemption is 
exceptionally granted 
by the Governing Council. 11.2 In accordance with Article 109a(2)(b) of this 
Treaty, the President, the Vice-President 
and the 
other Members of the 
Executive Board shall be appointed from 
among persons of recognised standing and 
professional experience in monetary or banking matters by common accord of the governments of the 
Member States at the level of the 
Heads of 
State or of Government, on a recommendation from the Council after 
it has consulted the European Parliament and 
the Governing 
Council. Their term 
of office shall be eight years and shall not 
be renewable. Only nationals of Member States may be members of the Executive 
Board. 11.3 The terms and conditions 
of employment of 
the members 
of the Executive Board, 
in particular their 
salaries, pensions and other social security benefits 
shall be the subject of contracts with the ECB and 
shall be fixed by the Governing Council on a proposal 
from the Committee 
comprising three members appointed 
by the Governing Council 
and three 
members appointed 
by the Council. The members of the 
Executive Board shall not have 
the right to 
vote on matters referred 
to in this paragraph. 11.4 If a member of the Executive Board 
no longer fulfils 
the conditions required for the performance of 
his duties 
or if he has been guilty of serious 
misconduct, the Court of Justice may, on 
application by the Governing Council 
or the Executive 
Board, compulsorily retire 
him. 11.5 Each member 
of the Executive 
Board present in person shall have the right to vote and shall have, for 
that purpose, one vote. 
Save as 
otherwise provided, the 
Executive Board shall act 
by a simple 
majority of the votes cast. In the event of a 
tie, the President shall have 
the casting 
vote. The voting 
arrangements shall 
be specified in the Rules of Procedure 
referred to 
in Article 12.3. 11.6 The Executive 
Board shall be 
responsible for the current 
business of the ECB. Annex I11 11.7 Any vacancy 
on the Executive Board shall be 
filled by the appointment of a 
new member in accordance with Article 11.2. ARTICLE 12 - Responsibilities of the decision-making bodies 12.1 The Governing Council 
shall adopt the 
guidelines and take 
the decisions necessary to 
ensure the performance 
of the tasks entrusted to 
the ESCB under this Treaty 
and this 
Statute. The Governing Council 
shall formulate the monetary 
policy of the Community including, as appropriate, decisions relating to intermediate monetary objectives, 
key interest rates and the supply of reserves 
in the ESCB, and shall establish the 
necessary guidelines for their implementation. The Executive 
Board shall implement 
monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines and decisions laid 
down by the Governing 
Council. In doing so 
the Executive 
Board shall give the necessary 
instructions to national 
central banks. In addition the Executive Board may have certain 
powers delegated 
to it 
where the Governing Council so 
decides. To the 
extent deemed possible 
and appropriate and without prejudice to the provisions of 
this Article, the ECB shall 
have recourse 
to the national central 
banks to carry out operations which form 
part of 
the tasks of the ESCB. 12.2 The Executive 
Board shall have responsibility for 
the preparation of meetings of 
the Governing 
Council. 12.3 The Governing 
Council shall 
adopt Rules 
of Procedure which 
determine the internal organisation 
of the ECB and its decision-making 
bodies. 12.4 The Governing 
Council shall exercise the 
advisory functions referred to in Article 4. 12.5 The Governing Council 
shall take 
the decisions 
referred to in Article 6. ARTICLE 13 - The President 
13.1 The President 
or, in his absence, the Vice-President shall chair the Governing Council and 
the Executive Board of the ECB. 13.2 Without prejudice to Article 39, the President or his nominee 
shall represent 
the ECB externally. 
ARTICLE 14 - National central 
banks 14.1 In accordance with 
Article 108 of this 
Treaty, each Member 
State shall ensure, 
at the latest at the date of the establishment 
of the ESCB, that its national legislation, 
including the statutes of 
its national 
central bank, is compatible with 
this Treaty 
and this Statute. 
14.2 The statutes of the 
national central 
banks shall, in particular, provide that 
the term of office of a 
Governor of a 
national central bank shall 
be no less than 
5 years. A Governor may be relieved from office only if he 
no longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of 
his duties or 
if he has been 
guilty of serious misconduct. 
A decision to 
this effect 
may be referred to the Court 
of Justice by the Governor 
concerned or the Governing 
Council on grounds of infringement of this 
Treaty or of any 
rule of law relating to , its application. Such proceedings shall 
be instituted within two months 
of the Annex I11 publication of the decision 
or of its notification to the plaintiff or, in the absence thereof, 
of the day on which it came to 
the knowledge 
of the latter, as 
the case may be. 14.3 The national central banks are an integral part of the ESCB and 
shall act in accordance with the guidelines 
and instructions of the ECB. The Governing Council 
shall take 
the necessary steps to ensure compliance 
with the guidelines and 
instructions of the ECB, and shall require 
that any necessary information 
be given to it. 14.4 National central 
banks may perform functions other 
than those specified in this Statute unless 
the Governing Council 
finds, by a majority of two' thirds 
of the votes cast, that these interfere 
with the objectives 
and tasks of the 
ESCB. Such functions shall be performed 
on the responsibility and liability of national central 
banks and 
shall not be regarded as being part of the 
functions of the ESCB. ARTICLE 15 - Reporting commitments 
15.1 The ECB shall draw up and publish reports 
on the activities 
of the ESCB at least quarterly. 
15.2 A consolidated financial statement of the ESCB 
shall be published each week. 15.3 In accordance with Article 109b(3) of this Treaty, the ECB shall address 
an annual report 
on the activities 
of the ESCB and on the monetary policy of both 
the previous and 
the current year 
to the European 
Parliament, the 
Council and the 
Commission, and also to 
the European Council. 15.4 The reports 
and statements referred 
to in this Article shall be made available to interested parties 
free of charge. 
ARTICLE 16 - Bank notes In accordance with Article 105a(l) of this 
Treaty, the Governing Council shall 
have the exclusive right to 
authorise the issue of bank notes within the Community. 
The ECB 
and the national 
central banks 
may issue such 
notes. The bank 
notes issued by the ECB and the 
national central 
banks shall be the only 
such notes 
to have the status of legal tender 
within the Community. The ECB shall 
respect as far as possible 
existing practices 
regarding the issue and design of bank 
notes. CHAPTER IV - MONETARY FUNCTIONS AND OPERATIONS OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 17 - Accounts with the ECB and the national central 
banks In order to conduct their 
operations, the ECB and the national 
central banks may open accounts 
for credit institutions, 
public entities 
and other market 
participants and accept assets, including book-entry 
securities, as collateral. ARTICLE 18 - Open market and 
credit operations 
18.1 In order to achieve the objectives 
of the ESCB 
and to carry out 
its tasks, 
the ECB and the 
national central 
banks may: Annex I11 - operate in the financial markets 
by buying and selling outright 
(spot and forward) 
or under repurchase 
agreement and 
by lending or borrowing 
claims and marketable 
.instruments, whether in 
Community or in non-Community currencies, as well as precious metals ; - conduct credit 
operations with credit institutions and other 
market participants, with lending being based 
on adequate collateral. 18.2 The ECB 
shall establish general principles 
for open market and credit operations 
carried out by itself or the national central 
banks, including for the announcement 
of conditions under which they stand 
ready to enter 
into such transactions. ARTICLE 19 
- Minimum reserves 19.1 Subject to Article 
2, the ECB may 
require credit institutions 
established in Member States to hold minimum reserves on accounts with the ECB and 
national central 
banks in pursuance of monetary policy objectives. Regulations concerning the 
calculation and determination of the required 
minimum reserves 
may be established 
by the Governing Council. In cases of non-compliance the ECB shall be entitled to 
levy penalty 
interest and to 
impose other sanctions 
with comparable effect. 19.2 For the application 
of this Article, the Council shall, in 
accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42, define the basis 
for minimum reserves and the maximum 
permissible ratios between 
those reserves 
and their basis, as 
well as the appropriate sanctions 
in cases of non-compliance. ARTICLE 20 - Other instruments of 
monetary control The Governing 
Council may, by a majority of 
two thirds of the votes cast, decide upon 
the use of such 
other operational methods 
of monetary control 
as it sees fit, respecting Article 
2. The Council shall, 
in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 42, define the scope 
of such methods if 
they impose obligations on third parties. ARTICLE 21 - Operations with public entities 
21.1 In accordance with Article 104 of this 
Treaty, overdrafts 
or any other 
type of 
credit facility with the ECB or 
with the national central 
banks in favour of Community institutions or bodies, 
central governments, 
regional, local or other 
public authorities, other bodies governed 
by public law or public undertakings of 
Member States shall be prohibited, as 
shall the purchase directly from 
them by the ECB or national central 
banks of debt instruments. 21.2 The 
ECB and national 
central banks may act as fiscal agents for 
the entities referred to 
in Article 21.1. 21.3 The provisions of this Article shall 
not apply to publicly-owned credit institutions which, in the context of the supply 
of reserves by central banks, 
shall be given the 
same treatment by national central banks and the ECB 
as private credit institutions. 
Annex I11 ARTICLE 22 - Clearing and payment systems The ECB and national 
central banks may provide facilities, 
and the ECB may issue regulations, 
to ensure efficient 
and sound clearing and 
payment systems within 
the Community and 
with other countries. 
ARTICLE 23 - External operations 
The ECB and national 
central banks 
may: - establish relations with central banks 
and financial 
institutions in other countries 
and, where appropriate, with international organisations; 
- acquire and sell spot and forward 
all types 
of foreign exchange assets and precious 
metals; the term "foreign exchange asset" 
shall include 
securities and 
all other assets in the currency of any 
country or units of 
account and 
in whatever form held; 
- hold and 
manage the assets referred 
to in this Article; - conduct all 
types of 
banking transactions in relations with third countries 
and international organisations, including borrowing and lending operations. 
ARTICLE 24 - Other operations 
In addition to operations arising 
from their tasks, the ECB and 
the national central 
banks may enter into operations for 
their administrative purposes or for 
their staff. CHAPTER V - PRUDENTIAL SUPERVISION 
ARTICLE 25 - Prudential supervision 
25.1 The ECB may offer advice to and 
be consulted 
by the Council, 
the Commission and 
the competent authorities of 
the Member States 
on the scope and implementation 
of Community 
legislation relating 
to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions and to 
the stability of the financial system. 25.2 In accordance with any decision 
of the 
Council under 
Article 105(6) of this Treaty, 
the ECB may perform specific tasks 
concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and other financial 
institutions with the exception of insurance undertakings. CWTER V1 - FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 26 - Financial accounts 
26.1 The financial year 
of the ECB and the national central 
banks shall begin on 
the first day of January and end on the last day 
of December. 26.2 The annual accounts 
of the ECB shall be drawn up 
by the Executive Board, 
in accordance with the principles established 
by the Governing Council. The accounts 
shall be approved by the Governing Council and 
shall thereafter 
be published. 26.3 For analytical and 
operational purposes, the Executive 
Board shall draw up a consolidated balance sheet of 
the ESCB, comprising 
those Annex I11 assets and liabilities 
of the 
national central 
banks that fall within 
the ESCB . 26.4 For the application of this 
Article, the Governing Council shall establish the necessary 
rules for standardising 
the accounting and reporting of operations undertaken 
by the national central banks. ARTICLE 27 - Auditing 27.1 The accounts 
of the ECB 
and national central 
banks shall 
be audited by independent external auditors recommended 
by the Governing Council and 
approved by the Council. 
The auditors shall 
have full power to examine 
all books and 
accounts of the 
ECB and 
national central 
banks and obtain full information about their transactions. 
27.2 The provisions 
of Article 188b of this Treaty 
shall only 
apply to an examination of the 
operational efficiency 
of the management 
of the ECB . ARTICLE 28 - Capital of the ECB 28.1 The capital 
of the ECB, which 
shall become operational upon its establishment, shall 
be ECU 5,000 million. The capital 
may be increased by such amounts as may be decided by the Governing Council acting 
by the qualified majority provided 
for in Article 10.3, within the limits and under the conditions set by the Council under the procedure laid 
down in Article 42. 28.2 The national central 
banks shall 
be the sole 
subscribers to and 
holders of the 
capital of the ECB. The subscription 
of capital shall 
be according to 
the key established in accordance with Article 29. 28.3 The Governing 
Council, acting by the qualified majority provided for in Article 10.3, shall determine 
the extent to 
which and the form in which the capital shall 
be paid up. 28.4 Subject to Article 
28.5, the shares of 
the national central banks in the subscribed capital 
of the ECB may 
not be transferred, pledged or attached. 
28.5 If the key 
referred to in Article 29 is adjusted, the 
national central banks shall transfer 
among themselves capital shares to the extent 
necessary to ensure that the distribution of capital shares corresponds to 
the adjusted key. The Governing Council shall determine 
the terms and conditions 
of such transfers. ARTICLE 29 - Key for capital subscription 
29.1 When in accordance with the 
procedure referred to in Article 1091(1) of this Treaty the ESCB and the 
ECB have been 
established, the key for 
subscription of the 
ECB's capital shall 
be established. Each 
national central bank shall be assigned a weighting 
in this key which 
shall be equal to 
the sum of: - 50% of 
the share of its respective Member State 
in the population of the 
Community in the penultimate year 
preceding the establishment 
of the ESCB; - 50% of 
the share 
of its 
respective Member State 
in the gross 
domestic product at market prices of 
the Community as recorded Annex I11 in the last five 
years preceding 
the penultimate 
year before the establishment of 
the ESCB; The percentages shall be rounded 
up to the nearest multiple 
of 0.05% points. 29.2 The statistical 
data to be used for the application of this 
Article shall be 
provided by the Commission 
in accordance with the rules 
adopted by the Council under 
the procedure provided 
for in Article 42. 29.3 The weightings 
assigned to the 
national central 
banks shall 
be adjusted every five years after the 
establishment of the ESCB 
by analogy with the provisions laid down in Article 29.1. The adjusted key shall apply 
with effect from the first day 
of the following year. 
29.4 The Governing Council 
shall take 
all other measures necessary 
for the application 
of this Article. 
ARTICLE 30 - Transfer of foreign reserve assets 
to the ECB 
30.1 Without prejudice to Article 28, the ECB shall 
be provided 
by the national central 
banks with foreign reserve assets, other than Member 
States' currencies, ECUs, IMF reserve positions and SDRs, up to an amount equivalent to ECU 50,000 million. The Governing Council shall decide upon 
the proportion to be called 
up by the ECB following its establishment 
and the amounts called up at later dates. The ECB 
shall have the full right to hold 
and manage the foreign reserves that are 
transferred to it and to use them for 
the purposes set out 
in this Statute. 30.2 The contributions of each national central 
bank shall be fixed in proportion to its 
share in the subscribed capital of the 
ECB. 30.3 Each national central 
bank shall be credited by the ECB with a claim equivalent to 
its contribution. 
The Governing 
Council shall determine 
the denomination 
and remuneration of such claims. 30.4 Further calls 
of foreign reserve assets beyond the 
limit set in Article 30.1 may be effected by the ECB, in accordance with Article 30.2, within the limits and 
under the conditions set 
by the Council in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42. 30.5 The ECB may 
hold and manage IMF reserve positions and SDRs and provide for the pooling 
of such assets. 30.6 The Governing Council shall 
take all other measures necessary 
for the application 
of this Article. 
ARTICLE 31 - Foreign reserve assets held by national central banks 
31.1 The national 
central banks shall be allowed to perform 
transactions in fulfilment of their 
obligations towards international 
organisations in accordance with Article 23. 31.2 All other operations in foreign reserve assets remaining 
with the national central 
banks after the transfers referred 
to in Article 30, and Member 
States' transactions with their foreign exchange working 
balances shall, above 
a certain limit to 
be established 
within the framework of Article 31.3, 
be subject 
to approval by the ECB 
in order to Annex I11 ensure consistency 
with the exchange rate and monetary 
policies of the Community. 31.3 The Governing 
Council shall 
issue gu'idelines with a view to facilitating such 
operations. ARTICLE 32 - Allocation of monetary income of national central banks 
32.1 The income 
accruing to the national central 
banks in the performance of the 
ESCB's monetary policy function (hereinafter referred 
to as "monetary 
income") shall be allocated at the end of 
each financial 
year in accordance with the provisions 
of this 
Article. 32.2 Subject to Article 32.3, 
the amount of 
each national 
central bank's monetary income 
shall be equal 
to its annual income derived from 
its assets held against notes 
in circulation and deposit liabilities to credit institutions. These assets shall 
be earmarked by national central 
banks in accordance with guidelines to 
be established by the Governing Council. 32.3 If, after the start 
of the third stage, the balance sheet 
structures of the national central 
banks do not, in the judgement of the 
Governing Council, 
permit the application of Article 
32.2, the Governing Council, acting 
by a qualified 
majority, may decide that, by way 
of derogation from Article 32.2, monetary income shall be 
measured according to an alternative method for 
a period of not more than five 
years. 32.4 The amount 
of each national central bank's monetary income shall be reduced 
by an amount equivalent to any interest paid by that central bank on its deposit 
liabilities to credit institutions in accordance with Article 19. The Governing Council 
may decide that national central 
banks shall be indemnified against costs 
incurred in connection with the issue of bank notes or 
in exceptional circumstances 
for specific losses arising from 
monetary policy operations undertaken for the ESCB. Indemnification shall be in a form deemed appropriate in the judgement of the Governing Council; 
these amounts may be offset against 
the national central 
banks' monetary income. 32.5 The sum 
of the national central banks' monetary income shall be allocated to the national 
central banks in proportion to their paid-up 
shares in the capital 
of the ECB, 
subject to any decision taken 
by the Governing Council 
pursuant to Article 33.2. 32.6 The clearing 
and settlement of the balances 
arising from the allocation of monetary income 
shall be carried out 
by the ECB in accordance with guidelines established by the Governing 
Council. 32.7 The Governing 
Council shall take 
all other measures necessary 
for the application of this 
Article. ARTICLE 33 - Allocation of net 
profits and losses of the 
ECB 33.1 The net profit of the ECB shall 
be transferred in the following 
order : (a) an amount to 
be determined 
by the Governing Council, which 
may not exceed 20% of the net profit, shall 
be transferred to the general reserve 
fund subject 
to a limit equal to 100% of the capital ; (b) the remaining net 
profit shall be distributed to the shareholders of the ECB in proportion to their paid-up shares. Annex I11 33.2 In the event of a loss incurred 
by the ECB, the shortfall may 
be offset against the general 
reserve fund 
of the ECB and, if necessary, following a decision by the Governing Council, against the monetary 
income of the relevant financial year 
in proportion and up to the amounts 
allocated to the national central 
banks in accordance with Article 32.5. CHAPTER V11 - GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 34 - Legal acts 
34.1 In accordance with Article 108a of this Treaty, the ECB shall: - make regulations 
to the extent necessary to implement the tasks defined in Article 3.1, 
first indent, Articles 19.1, 
22 or 25.2 and in cases which shall be laid down in the acts of the 
Council referred to in Article 42; - take decisions necessary 
for carrying out 
the tasks 
entrusted to the ESCB under this 
Treaty and 
this Statute; - make recommendations and deliver opinions. 
34.2 A regulation shall have general 
application. It shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable 
in all Member 
States. Recommendations and opinions shall 
have no binding force. 
A decision shall 
be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed. Articles 190 to 192 of this Treaty shall apply 
to regulations and decisions adopted by the ECB. The ECB may decide 
to publish 
its decisions, recommendations 
and opinions. 
34.3 Within the limits 
and under the 
conditions adopted by the Council under the 
procedure laid down in Article 42, the ECB shall be entitled to 
impose fines or 
periodic penalty payments 
on undertakings for failure to comply with obligations under its regulations 
and decisions. ARTICLE 35 - Judicial control 
and related matters 35.1 The acts or 
omissions of the ECB shall be open to review or interpretation by the Court of Justice in the cases and under the conditions laid down in this Treaty. The ECB 
may institute proceedings in the cases and 
under the conditions laid 
down in this Treaty. 35.2 Disputes between 
the ECB, on 
the one 
hand, and its creditors, 
debtors or any other 
person, on the other, shall be decided by the competent national 
courts, save where jurisdiction has been 
conferred upon the Court of Justice. 35.3 The ECB shall 
be subject to the liability regime provided for 
in Article 215 of this Treaty. The national central banks shall be liable according 
to their 
respective national 
laws. 35.4 The Court 
of Justice shall have jurisdiction to give judgement pursuant to any 
arbitration clause contained 
in a contract concluded 
by or on behalf of the 
ECB, whether that contract be governed by public or private law. 35.5 A decision of the ECB to bring 
an action before the Court of Justice shall 
be taken by the Governing Council. 
Annex I11 35.6 The Court of Justice shall 
have jurisdiction 
in disputes concerning the fulfilment by a national central 
bank of obligations under this Statute. 
If the ECB considers that a national central 
bank has failed to fulfil an obligation under this Statute, it shall deliver 
a reasoned opinion on the matter after giving the 
national central 
bank concerned 
the opportunity to submit its observations. 
If the national central bank concerned does not comply with the opinion within the period laid 
down by the ECB, the latter may 
bring the matter before the Court of Justice. ARTICLE 36 - Staff 36.1 The 
Governing Council, on a 
proposal from the Executive Board, shall lay 
down the conditions of employment of the 
staff of the 
ECB. 36.2 The 
Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction 
in any dispute 
between the ECB 
and its servants 
within the limits and under the conditions laid down in the conditions of employment. ARTICLE 37 - Seat Before the 
end of 
1992, the decision as to where the seat 
of the ECB will be established shall 
be taken by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the 
level of Heads of State or of Government. ARTICLE 38 - Professional secrecy 38.1 Members of the governing bodies 
and the staff of the ECB and the national central 
banks shall be required, even 
after their duties 
have ceased, not to disclose information 
of the kind covered 
by the obligation of professional secrecy. 38.2 Persons having access 
to data covered by Community legislation 
imposing an obligation of secrecy shall 
be subject to such legislation. 
ARTICLE 39 - Signatories The ECB shall 
be legally committed to third parties 
by the President or by two members 
of the 
Executive Board or by the signatures of two members of the 
staff of the ECB who have been 
duly authorised by the President to sign 
on behalf of the ECB. ARTICLE 40 - Privileges and immunities The ECB 
shall enjoy in the territories of the Member States 
such privileges and immunities as are necessary for 
the performance 
of its tasks, under the 
conditions laid down in the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities annexed to the Treaty 
establishing a Single Council 
and a Single Commission 
of the European Communities. 
CHAPTER V111 - AMENDMENT OF 
THE STATUTE AND COMPLEMENTARY LEGISLATION 
ARTICLE 41 - Simplified amendment 
procedure 41.1 In accordance with Article 106(5) of this Treaty, Articles 5.1, 
5.2, 5.3, 17, 18, 19.1, 22, 23, 
24, 26, 32.2, 32.3, 32.4, 32.6, 
33.l(a) and 36 of this Statute may 
be amended by the Council, acting either 
by a qualified majority 
on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting 
Annex 111 the Commission, or unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the ECB. In either case 
the assent of the European Parliament 
shall be required. 41.2 A recommendation made 
by the ECB under this Article shall require a unanimous decision 
by the Governing Council. ARTICLE 42 - Complementary legislation 
In accordance with Article 106(6) of this Treaty, immediately after the decision on the date for the beginning of the third 
stage, the Council, acting by a qualified majority either on a 
proposal from the Commission and after consulting 
the European Parliament 
and the ECB, or on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting the European Parliament 
and the 
Commission, shall adopt the provisions referred to in Articles 4, 5.4, 19.2, 20, 28.1, 29.2, 30.4 and 
34.3 of this Statute. CHAPTER IX - TRANSITIONAL AND OTHER PROVISIONS FOR 
THE ESCB ARTICLE 43 - General provisions 43.1 A derogation as referred 
to in Article 109k(l) of this Treaty 
shall entail that the following 
Articles of this Statute shall not confer any rights or impose any obligations 
on the Member State concerned: 
3, 6, 9.2, 12.1, 14.3, 
16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 
26.2, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 
50 and 52. 
43.2 The central banks of Member States 
with a derogation as 
specified in Article 109k(l) of this Treaty shall 
retain their powers 
in the field of monetary policy according 
to national law. 43.3 In accordance with Article 109k(4) of this 
Treaty, "Member 
Statesn shall be read as "Member States without a derogation" in the following Articles 
of this Statute: 
3, 11.2, 19, 34.2 and 50. 43.4 "National central banks" 
shall be read as "central 
banks of Member States without 
a derogationn in 
the following Articles 
of this Statute: 9.2, 10.1, 10.3, 12.1, 16, 17, 18, 
22, 23, 27, 30, 31, 
32, 33.2 and 52. 43.5 "Shareholders" shall be read as "central banks of Member States without a derogation" in 
Articles 10.3 and 33.1. 43.6 "Subscribed capital 
of the ECB" shall be read as "capital 
of the ECB 
subscribed by the central banks of Member States without 
a derogationn in Articles 10.3 and 
30.2. ARTICLE 44 - Transitional tasks 
of the 
ECB The ECB shall take over 
those tasks of 
the EM1 which, because of the derogations of one or more Member States, still have to be performed in the third stage. 
The ECB shall give 
advice in the preparations for 
the abrogation of the derogations specified in Article 1091 of this Treaty. 
ARTICLE 45 - The General Council of the ECB 
45.1 Without prejudice to Article 106(3) of this Treaty, the General Council shall be constituted as a third decision-making body of the ECB. Annex I11 45.2 The General Council 
shall comprise the President and Vice-President of the ECB and the 
Governors of 
t.he national central 
banks. The other members 
of the Executive Board may participate, without having the right to vote, 
in meetings of the General Council. 45.3 The responsibilities 
of the General Council are 
listed in full in Article 47 of this Statute. ARTICLE 46 - Rules of procedure of the General Council 46.1 The President 
or, in his absence, the Vice-President of the ECB 
shall chair the 
General Council of the ECB. 46.2 The President 
of the Council and a member 
of the 
Commission may participate, without having the right 
to vote, in 
meetings of the General Council. 46.3 The President 
shall prepare the 
meetings of the 
General Council. 46.4 By 
way of derogation from Article 
12.3, the 
General Council 
shall adopt its Rules 
of Procedure. 
46.5 The Secretariat of the General Council shall 
be provided by the ECB . ARTICLE 47 - Responsibilities of the General Council 
47.1 The General Council 
shall: - perform the tasks referred 
to in Article 44; - contribute to the advisory 
functions referred to in Articles 4 
and 25.1. 47.2 The 
General Council shall contribute to: - the collection 
of statistical information as referred to in 
Article 5; - the reporting activities of the ECB 
as referred to in Article 15; - the establishment 
of the necessary rules for the application of Article 26 as referred to in Article 26.4; - the taking of all other measures 
necessary for the application of Article 29 as referred to in Article 29.4; - the laying down of the conditions of employment of the staff of the ECB as referred to in Article 36. 47.3 The General Council shall contribute to the necessary 
preparations for irrevocably fixing 
the exchange rates 
of the 
currencies of Member States with a derogation against 
the currencies, or the single 
currency, of the Member States without a derogation, 
as referred to in Article 1091(5) of this Treaty. 47.4 The General Council 
shall be informed by the President of the ECB of decisions of the 
Governing Council. ARTICLE 48 - Transitional provisions for the capital 
of the ECB 
In accordance with Article 29.1 each national central 
bank shall be assigned a weighting 
in the key for 
subscription of the ECB's capital. By 
way of derogation from Article 28.3, central banks of 
Member States with a derogation shall not 
pay up their subscribed capital unless 
the General Council, 
acting by a majority representing at least two thirds 
Annex I11 of the subscribed 
capital of the ECB and at least half 
of the shareholders, 
decides that 
a minimal percentage has 
to be paid up as a contribution to the operational costs 
of the 
ECB. ARTICLE 49 - Deferred payment of capital, reserves and provisions 
of the ECB 49.1 The central 
bank of 
a Member State whose derogation has 
been abrogated shall pay up its subscribed share of the 
capital of the ECB 
to the same extent as the 
central banks of other Member States without 
a derogation, and 
shall transfer 
to the ECB 
foreign reserve assets 
in accordance with Article 30.1. The sum 
to be transferred shall be determined by multiplying the ECU value 
at current exchange 
rates of the 
foreign reserve assets 
which have already been transferred 
to the ECB 
in accordance with Article 30.1, 
by the ratio between 
the number 
of shares subscribed 
by the national central 
bank concerned 
and the number of shares 
already paid up by the other national central 
banks. 49.2 In addition to 
the payment 
to be made in accordance with Article 49.1, the central bank concerned 
shall contribute to the 
reserves of the ECB, 
to those provisions equivalent 
to reserves, and to 
the amount still to 
be appropriated to the 
reserves and 
provisions corresponding to the balance 
of the profit and loss account 
as at 31st December of the year 
prior to the abrogation 
of the derogation. The sum to 
be contributed shall 
be determined by multiplying the amount of the reserves, as defined above 
and as stated 
in the approved balance sheet of 
the ECB, 
by the 
ratio between the number 
of shares subscribed 
by the central bank concerned 
and the number 
of shares already 
paid up by the other central banks. ARTICLE 50 - Initial appointment of the members 
of the Executive Board When the Executive 
Board of the ECB is being established, the President, the Vice-President 
and the other members of the 
Executive Board shall be appointed by common accord of the governments of 
the Member States 
at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government, on a recommendation from 
the Council and after consulting 
the European Parliament and 
the Council of the EMI. The President 
of the Executive 
Board shall be 
appointed for 
eight years. By way of derogation from 
Article 11.2, the Vice-President shall 
be appointed for four years 
and the other members of 
the Executive 
Board for 
terms of 
office of between 
five and eight years. 
No term 
of office shall be renewable. The 
number of members 
of the Executive Board may be smaller than 
provided for in Article 11.1, but in no circumstance shall 
it be less than four. ARTICLE 51 - Derogation from 
Article 32 51.1 If, after the start 
of the third stage, the Governing Council 
decides that 
the application of Article 
32 results in significant changes in national central 
banks' relative income positions, the amount 
of income to be allocated pursuant to Article 32 shall be 
reduced by a uniform percentage which shall not exceed 60% in the first financial 
year after the start of the 
third stage and 
which shall decrease by at least 12 percentage points in each subsequent financial year. 51.2 Article 51.1 shall be applicable for 
not more than five 
financial years after 
the start of the third stage. 
Annex I11 ARTICLE 52 - Exchange of bank notes in Conrmunity currencies Following the irrevocable fixing of exchange 
rates, the Governing Council shall take 
the necessary measures 
to ensure that 
bank notes denominated in currencies with irrevocably fixed exchange rates are 
exchanged by the national central 
banks at their respective 
par values. ARTICLE 53 - Applicability of the transitional provisions 
If and as long as there are Member States 
with a derogation Articles 43 to 48 shall be applicable. Annex IV TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNION AS SIGNED ON 7TH FEBRUARY 
1992 PROTOCOL ON THE STATUTE OF THE 
EUROPEAN MONETARY INSTITUTE 
THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES, 
DESIRING to lay down the Statute of the 
European Monetary Institute, 
HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, 
which shall be annexed to the 
Treaty establishing 
the European Community: ARTICLE 1 - Constitution and name 1.1 The European 
Monetary Institute (EMI) 
shall be established 
in accordance with Article 109f of this 
Treaty; it shall perform its functions 
and carry out its activities 
in accordance with the provisions of this 
Treaty and of 
this Statute. 
1.2 The members 
of the 
EM1 shall be the central banks of the 
Member States ("national central banks"). For the 
purposes of 
this Statute, 
the Institut monetaire luxembourgeois shall 
be regarded as the central 
bank of 
Luxembourg. 1.3 Pursuantto Article109f of this 
Treaty, both the Committee 
of Governors and the European 
Monetary Co-operation Fund 
(EMCF) shall be dissolved. All assets 
and liabilities of the 
EMCF shall pass 
automatically to the EMI. ARTICLE 2 - Objectives The EM1 shall contribute 
to the realisation 
of the conditions necessary for the transition 
to the third stage of Economic 
and Monetary Union, in 
particular by: - strengthening the co-ordination 
of monetary policies 
with a view to ensuring price stability; - making the preparations required 
for the establishment 
of the European System 
of Central Banks 
(ESCB), and for 
the conduct of a single monetary 
policy and the creation of 
a single currency in the third 
stage; - overseeing the development of the 
ECU. ARTICLE 3 - General principles 3.1 The EM1 shall carry 
out the 
tasks and 
functions conferred upon it by this Treaty 
and this Statute without 
prejudice to the responsibility 
of the competent authorities for 
the conduct 
of the monetary 
policy within the respective Member 
States. 3.2 The EM1 shall act 
in accordance with the objectives and 
principles stated in Article 2 of the 
Statute of the 
ESCB. ARTICLE 4 - Primary tasks 4.1 In accordance with Article 109f(2) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall : - strengthen co-operation 
between the 
national central banks; 
Annex IV - strengthen the co-ordination 
of the 
monetary policies of 
the Member States 
with the aim of ensuring price 
stability; - monitor the functioning of 
the ~uro~ean Monetary System 
(EMS); - hold consultations concerning 
issues falling 
within the competence of the national central 
banks and 
affecting the stability of 
financial institutions and markets; 
- take over the tasks of 
the EMCF; in particular it shall perform 
the functions 
referred to in Articles 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3; - facilitate the use 
of the ECU and oversee its development, 
including the smooth functioning of the 
ECU clearing system. The EM1 shall also: 
- hold regular 
consultations concerning the 
course of monetary 
policies and the use 
of monetary policy instruments; - normally be consulted 
by the national monetary authorities 
before they take decisions 
on the course of 
monetary policy in the context 
of the common framework for ex ante co-ordination. 
4.2 At the latest 
by 31st December 1996, 
the EM1 shall specify the regulatory, organisational 
and logistical framework necessary for 
the ESCB 
to perform its 
tasks in the third stage, in accordance with the principle 
of an open market economy with free competition. This 
framework shall 
be submitted by the Council 
of the EM1 for decision to 
the ECB at the date 
of its establishment. In accordance with Article 109f(3) of this Treaty, the 
EM1 shall in particular: - prepare the instruments 
and the procedures 
necessary for 
carrying out 
a single 
monetary policy in the third 
stage; - promote the harmonisation, where necessary, 
of the rules 
and practices governing the 
collection, compilation 
and distribution of statistics 
in the areas 
within its field of competence; - prepare the rules for 
operations to be undertaken by the national central 
banks in the framework of the 
ESCB; - promote the efficiency 
of cross-border payments; 
- supervise the technical preparation 
of ECU bank notes. ARTICLE 5 - Advisory functions 
5.1 In accordance with Article 109f(4) of this Treaty, the Council 
of the EM1 may formulate opinions or recommendations 
on the overall 
orientation of monetary 
policy and 
exchange rate policy as well as on 
related measures introduced in each Member 
State. The EM1 may submit opinions or recommendations 
to governments and to 
the Council on policies which might affect 
the internal or external monetary 
situation in the Community and, in particular, the functioning of the EMS. 5.2 The Council 
of the EM1 may also make recommendations to 
the monetary authorities 
of the 
Member States concerning the conduct of their monetary policy. 5.3 In accordance with Article 109f(6) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall be consulted by the Council regarding 
any proposed Community 
act within its field 
of competence. 
Within the limits and 
under the conditions set out by the Council acting 
by a qualified majority on a proposal 
from the Commission 
and after consulting 
the European Parliament 
and the EMI, the 
EM1 shall be consulted by the authorities 
of the Member States on any draft legislative 
Annex IV provision within its field 
of competence, in particular with regard to Article 4.2. 5.4 In accordance with Article 109f(5) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 may publish its opinions 
and its recommendations. ARTICLE 6 - Operational and technical functions 
6.1 The EM1 shall: - provide for the multilateralisation of positions 
resulting from 
interventions by the national central 
banks in Community currencies and the multilateralisation of intra-Community settlements; - administer the very short-term financing mechanism 
provided for 
by the Agreement 
of 13th March 1979 between the central 
banks of the Member 
States of the European Economic Community laying down the operating procedures 
for the European Monetary System 
(hereinafter referred 
to as "EMS Agreementn) and the short-term 
monetary support mechanism provided for in the Agreement 
between the central 
banks of the Member States 
of the European 
Economic Community of 
9th February 1970, as amended; 
- perform the functions referred 
to in Article 11 of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 1969188 of 24th June 
1988 establishing a 
single facility 
providing medium-term financial assistance for 
Member States' balances of 
payments. 6.2 The 
EM1 may receive 
monetary reserves 
from the national 
central banks and issue ECUs against such 
assets for the 
purpose of implementing 
the EMS Agreement. These ECUs may be used 
by the EM1 and the national 
central banks as a 
means of settlement and 
for transactions between them 
and the 
EMI. The EM1 shall take the necessary administrative measures for 
the implementation of this 
paragraph. 6.3 The EM1 may grant to the 
monetary authorities 
of third 
countries and to international 
monetary institutions the 
status of 
"Other Holders" of ECUs 
and fix the terms and conditions under which such ECUs may be acquired, held 
or used by Other Holders. 
6.4 The EM1 shall be entitled to hold and manage foreign 
exchange reserves as 
an agent for 
and at the request 
of national central 
banks. Profits and losses 
regarding these reserves shall 
be for the account 
of the national central 
bank depositing 
the reserves. The EM1 shall perform this 
function on 
the basis of bilateral 
contracts in accordance with rules laid 
down in a decision of the 
EMI. These rules shall ensure that transactions 
with these reserves 
shall not interfere with the monetary policy and 
exchange rate 
policy of 
the competent monetary 
authority of 
any Member State and 
shall be consistent with the objectives 
of the EM1 and the proper 
functioning of the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
of the 
EMS. ARTICLE 7 - Other tasks 
7.1 Once a year the 
EM1 shall address a 
report to the Council 
on the state 
of the 
preparations for the 
third stage. These reports 
shall include an assessment of the progress towards 
convergence in the Community, and cover 
in particular the 
adaptation of monetary policy instruments and 
the preparation 
of the procedures necessary for carrying out 
a single 
monetary policy in the third stage, as well as 
the statutory 
requirements Annex IV to be fulfilled for national 
central banks 
to become an integral part of 
the ESCB. 7.2 In accordance with the Council decisions referred 
to in Article 109f(7) of this 
Treaty, the EM1 may perform other tasks for 
the preparation of the third stage. ARTICLE 8 - Independence The members 
of the Council of 
the EM1 who are the representatives of their institutions 
shall, with respect to 
their activities, act according 
to their 
own responsibilities. In exercising the powers and performing the tasks and duties conferred 
upon them 
by this Treaty and 
this Statute, the Council of the EM1 may not seek or take any 
instructions from Community institutions or 
bodies or governments of Member States. The Community institutions and bodies 
as well 
as the governments of the 
Member States undertake to respect this principle and 
not to seek to influence the 
Council of the EM1 in the performance of its tasks. ARTICLE 9 - Administration 9.1 In accordance with Article 109f(l) of this 
Treaty, the EM1 shall be directed and 
managed by the Council of 
the EMI. 9.2 The Council 
of the EM1 shall consist of a 
President and the Governors of the national 
central banks, one 
of whom shall be Vice-President. If a Governor is 
prevented from attending 
a meeting, he may nominate another 
representative of 
his institution. 9.3 The President shall 
be appointed 
by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the level of Heads of 
State or of 
Government, on a recommendation from, 
as the case 
may be, the Committee of 
Governors or the Council 
of the EMI, and after consulting the 
European Parliament and the 
Council. The President 
shall be selected 
from among persons 
of recognised standing and professional experience 
in monetary or banking matters. Only nationals 
of Member States may be President 
of the EMI. The Council of the 
EM1 shall appoint 
the Vice-President. The President and 
Vice-President shall be appointed for a 
period of three years. 9.4 The President 
shall perform 
his duties on 
a full-time basis. He shall not engage 
in any occupation, 
whether gainful or 
not, unless exemption is 
exceptionally granted 
by the Council of the 
EMI. 9.5 The President 
shall: - prepare and chair 
the meetings of the 
Council of the 
EMI; - without prejudice to Article 22, present the views of 
the EM1 externally; - be responsible for 
the day-to-day management 
of the 
EMI. In the absence 
of the President, his duties shall 
be performed 
by the Vice-President. 
9.6 The terms and conditions of employment of 
the President, 
in particular his salary, pension 
and other social security 
benefits, shall be the subject of a 
contract with the EM1 and shall be fixed by the Council of the EM1 on a proposal from a Committee comprising three 
members appointed by the Committee of Governors 
or the Council of the EMI, as the 
case may Annex IV be, and three members 
appointed by the Council. The President 
shall not have the right to 
vote on 
matters referred to in this paragraph. 
9.7 If the President no 
longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of his duties 
or if he has been 
guilty of serious misconduct, the Court of Justice may, on application by the Council of the 
EMI, compulsorily retire him. 
9.8 The Rules 
of Procedure of the EM1 shall be adopted by the Council of the EMI. 
ARTICLE 10 - Meetings of the Council 
of the EMI and voting procedures 
10.1 The 
Council of the EM1 shall meet at least ten times 
a year. The proceedings of Council meetings 
shall be confidential. The 
Council of the EM1 may, acting unanimously, decide to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public. 10.2 Each member 
of the Council of the EM1 or his nominee shall have 
one vote. 10.3 Save as 
otherwise provided for in this Statute, the Council of the EM1 shall act by a simple majority 
of its members. 10.4 Decisions to be taken in the context of Articles 4.2, 5.4, 6.2 
and 6.3 shall require unanimity of the members of the Council of the EMI. 
The adoption of opinions and recommendations under Articles 
5.1 and 5.2, the adoption of decisions under Articles 
6.4, 16 and 23.6 and the adoption of guidelines under Article 
15.3 shall require a qualified majority of two-thirds of the members of the Council of the EMI. 
ARTICLE 11 - Inter-institutional co-operation and reporting 
requirements 11.1 The 
President of the Council and a member of the Commission may participate, without having the right 
to vote, in meetings of the Council of the EMI. 11.2 The 
President of the EM1 shall be invited to participate 
in Council meetings 
when the Council is discussing 
matters relating 
to the objectives and tasks of the EMI. 
11.3 At 
a date to be established in the Rules of Procedure, the EM1 shall prepare 
an annual report 
on its activities and on monetary and financial conditions 
in the Community. The annual report, together with 
the annual accounts 
of the EMI, shall be addressed to the 
European Parliament, the Council and the 
Commission and also to the European Council. 
The President of the EM1 may, at the request of the European Parliament or on his own initiative, 
be heard by the competent Committees 
of the European Parliament. 11.4 Reports published by the EM1 shall be made available 
to interested parties free of charge. ARTICLE 12 - Currency denomination The operations of the 
EM1 shall be expressed in ECU. ARTICLE 13 - Seat Before the end of 1992, the decision as to where the seat of the EM1 will be established shall 
be taken by common accord of the Annex IV governments of the Member States 
at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government. ARTICLE 14 - Legal capacity The EMI, which 
in accordance with Article 109f(l) of this 
Treaty shall 
have legal personality, 
shall enjoy 
in each of the Member 
States the 
most extensive legal 
capacity accorded 
to legal 
persons under their law; it may, in 
particular, acquire 
or dispose of movable or immovable property 
and may be a party to legal 
proceedings. ARTICLE 15 - Legal acts 
15.1 In the performance of 
its tasks, and under 
the conditions laid down in this Statute, the EM1 shall: - deliver opinions; 
- make recommendations; 
- adopt guidelines, 
and take 
decisions, which 
shall be addressed to the national central 
banks. 15.2 Opinions and recommendations of the 
EM1 shall have no binding force . 15.3 The Council of the 
EM1 may adopt guidelines laying 
down the methods for the implementation 
of the conditions necessary for 
the ESCB 
to perform its functions in the third stage. 
EM1 guidelines shall have 
no binding force; they shall 
be submitted for decision to 
the ECB. 
15.4 Without prejudice to Article 3.1, a decision of the EM1 shall be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed. Articles 
190 and 191 of this Treaty shall 
apply to these decisions. 
ARTICLE 16 - Financial resources 16.1 The EM1 shall be endowed with its own resources. The size 
of the resources 
of the EM1 shall be determined by the Council of the 
EM1 with a view to ensuring 
the income deemed necessary to cover 
the administrative expenditure incurred 
in the performance of the 
tasks and functions 
of the 
EM1 . 16.2 The resources 
of the EM1 determined in accordance with Article 16.1 shall be provided out 
of contributions by the national central 
banks in accordance with the key referred to in Article 29.1 of the 
Statute of the ESCB 
and be paid up at the establishment of 
the EMI. For this purpose, the statistical 
data to be used for the determination 
of the key shall be provided by the Commission, 
in accordance with the rules adopted 
by the Council, acting by a qualified majority on a proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting 
the European Parliament, the Committee of Governors and the Committee referred to in Article 109c of this Treaty. 
16.3 The Council of the 
EM1 shall determine 
the form in which contributions shall 
be paid up. 
ARTICLE 17 - Annual accounts and auditing 17.1 The financial year 
of the EM1 shall begin 
on the first day 
of January and 
end on the last day of 
December. 17.2 The Council 
of the 
EM1 shall adopt an annual budget before the beginning of each financial year. Annex IV 
17.3 The annual accounts shall 
be drawn up in accordance with the principles established 
by the Council of the EMI. 
The annual accounts shall be approved by the Council of the EM1 and shall thereafter 
be published. 17.4 The annual accounts shall 
be audited by independent external auditors approved 
by the Council 
of the EMI. The auditors shall 
have full power to examine all 
books and accounts of the 
EM1 and to 
obtain full information about its 
transactions. The provisions of 
Article 188b of this Treaty shall 
only apply 
to an examination of the operational efficiency of 
the management 
of the EM1 . 17.5 Any surplus of the 
EM1 shall be transferred in the following 
order: (a) an amount to 
be determined 
by the Council of the 
EM1 shall be transferred to 
the general reserve fund 
of the 
EMI; (b) any remaining surplus shall 
be distributed to the 
national central banks in accordance with the key referred to 
in Article 16.2. 17.6 In the event of 
a loss incurred 
by the EMI, the shortfall shall 
be offset against the general reserve 
fund of the EMI. Any remaining shortfall shall 
be made good by contributions from the national central banks, in accordance with the key as 
referred to 
in Article 16.2. ARTICLE 18 - Staff 18.1 The Council 
of the EM1 shall lay 
down the conditions of employment of the staff of the 
EMI. 18.2 The Court 
of Justice shall 
have jurisdiction in any dispute 
between the EM1 and its servants 
within the limits and 
under the conditions laid down in the conditions of employment. ARTICLE 19 - Judicial control 
and related 
matters 19.1 The acts or 
omissions of the EM1 shall be open to review 
or interpretation by the Court of Justice in the cases and under the conditions laid down in this Treaty. The 
EM1 may institute proceedings 
in the cases and under the conditions laid 
down in this Treaty. 19.2 Disputes between the EMI, on the one 
hand, and its creditors, 
debtors or any 
other person, 
on the other, shall fall within 
the jurisdiction of the competent national 
courts, save where jurisdiction has been conferred 
upon the Court of Justice. 
19.3 The EM1 shall be subject to the liability regime 
provided for in Article 215 of this Treaty. 19.4 The Court 
of Justice shall have jurisdiction to give 
judgement pursuant to any arbitration clause 
contained in a contract concluded 
by or on behalf of 
the EMI, whether that contract be governed by public or 
private law. 
19.5 A decision of the EM1 to bring an action before the Court 
of Justice shall be taken by the Council of the 
EMI. Annex IV ARTICLE 20 - Professional secrecy 20.1 Members of 
the Council 
of the EM1 and the staff of the 
EM1 shall be required, even after 
their duties have ceased, not to disclose 
information of the kind 
covered by the obligation of professional secrecy. 
20.2 Persons having access 
to data covered by Community legislation 
imposing an obligation of secrecy shall 
be subject to such legislation. 
ARTICLE 21 - Privileges and 
inununities The EM1 shall enjoy in the territories of the 
Member States such privileges 
and immunities as are necessary for the 
performance of its tasks, under 
the conditions laid down in the Protocol on the Privileges and 
Immunities of the 
European Communities annexed 
to the 
Treaty establishing a 
Single Council and 
a Single Commission of the European Communities. 
ARTICLE 22 - Signatories The EM1 shall be legally committed 
to third parties 
by the President or the Vice-President 
or by the signatures of 
two members 
of the staff of 
the EM1 who have been duly authorised 
by the President to sign on 
behalf of 
the EMI. ARTICLE 23 - Liquidation of the EMI 23.1 In accordance with 
Article 1091 of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall go into liquidation 
on the establishment of the 
ECB. All assets 
and liabilities of 
the EM1 shall then pass automatically to the ECB. The latter shall liquidate 
the EM1 according to the 
provisions of this Article. The liquidation 
shall be completed by the beginning of the third stage. 
23.2 The mechanism for 
the creation of ECUs against gold and US dollars as provided for by Article 17 of the EMS Agreement shall be unwound by the first day 
of the third 
stage in accordance with Article 20 of the said Agreement. 
23.3 All claims and liabilities 
arising from 
the very short-term financing mechanism 
and the short-term monetary 
support mechanism, under the Agreements referred to in Article 6.1, shall be settled 
by the first 
day of the third stage. 23.4 All remaining assets of the 
EM1 shall be disposed of and 
all remaining liabilities 
of the 
EM1 shall be settled. 
23.5 The proceeds of 
the liquidation described in Article 23.4 shall be distributed to the national central 
banks in accordance with the key referred to 
in Article 16.2. 23.6 The Council 
of the 
EM1 may take 
the measures necessary for 
the application of Articles 23.4 and 23.5. 23.7 Upon the establishment 
of the ECB, the President of the EM1 shall relinquish his 
office. COMMITTEE OF 
GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE 
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY 
ANNUAL REPORT (July 1990 - December 1991) ISBN 92-9166-201-1 (PRINT), 92-9166-202-X (ONLINE)MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
A. Verplaetse APRIL 1992 Nationale Bank 
van BelgiGlBanque Nationale de Belgique 
E. Hoffmeyer Danmarks Nationalbank H. Schlesinger* Deutsche Bundesbank 
E. Christodoulou** Bank of Greece M. Rubio Banco de 
Espafia J. de Larosi5re Banque de France 
M. Doyle C. Ciampi Central Bank of Ireland Banca d'Italia P. Jaans Institut Monetaire Luxembourgeois W. Duisenberg Nederlandsche Bank J. Tavares Moreira 
R. Leigh-Pemberton Banco de Portugal 
Bank of England A member of the Commission of the 
European Communities 
is invited, as a representative, to the 
meetings of the Committee of Governors. * Replaced K.O. Pbhl with effect from 1st August 1991. 
** Replaced D. Chalikias with effect from 18th February 
1992. TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Pane INTRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT ..................... 1 PART A 
MONETARY ISSVES AhlD THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
. I . ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE OF 
GOVERNORS .......... 1 . Co-ordination of monetary policies 
........... 2 . Monitoring EMS developments .............. 3 . Work related to the move to the final stage of EMU ... 4 . Issues in the 
field of Banking Supervision and payment systems ........................ 5 . Relationships with central banks outside the Community . 6 . Co-operation with 
other Community bodies ........ I1 . ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
AND MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION . . 1 . The economic background to monetary policy 
....... 2 . Monetary and exchange rate developments ........ 3 . Prospects and monetary policy issues .......... I11 . THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES 
OF THE NEW MONETARY INSTITUTIONS 
IN STAGES TWO AND THREE OF ECONOMIC 
AND MONETARY UNION 
.... 1 . The European System 
of Central Banks .......... 2 . The European Monetary Institute 
............ PART B THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS . I . THE CREATION AND THE EVOLVING ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF ......................... GOVERNORS I1 . THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF 
THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS . I . Revised mandate 
of the Committee of Governors ........ I1 . Harmonisation of broad monetary aggregates ......... I11 . The Statute of the European System 
of Central Banks 
and of the European Central 
Bank .................... IV . The Statute of the European Monetary Institute 
....... SUMMARY TABLE : CHART 1 TABLE 1 TABLE 2 TABLE 3 TABLE 4 CHART 2 TABLE 5 TABLE 6 TABLE 7 CHART 3 CHART 4 CHART 5 CHART 6 CHART 7 CHART 8 CHART 9 TABLE 8 CHART 10 Abbreviations and symbols used 
in the Tables and Charts are listed on Pane 
65 Page ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
IN THE COMMUNITY . . . 
. . . . 
. . 
. . . 
. . . . . 
. . . 4 REAL GROWTH AND INFLATION IN THE 
COMMUNITY . . . 
6 DEVELOPMENTS IN REAL GDP 
. . . . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. 18 DEVELOPMENTS IN CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION . . . . 
19 WAGE DEVELOPMENTS (Compensation 
per employee) . . 
22 GENERAL GOVERNMENT BORROWING 
REQUIREMENTS . . . 2 3 
BUDGETARY POSITIONS 
IN THE COMMUNITY . . . 
. . 
. 25 CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCES 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . 
. 26 DEVELOPMENTS IN BROAD MONETARY AGGREGATES 
. . . 
2 8 
MONETARY TARGETS AND 
OUTTURNS . . . . . . . . 
. 29 SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES IN ERM COUNTRIES 
. 31 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
IN INTEREST RATES 
. . . . 
. 3 2 LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES 
IN ERM COUNTRIES 
. . . 
35 EXCHANGE RATES OF THE ECU AGAINST 
THE US 
DOLLAR ANDJAPANESEYEN . . . . 
. . . 
. . . . . . 
. . 
. 3 6 
POSITIONS OF ERM CURRENCIES . . . 
. . . . . . . 38 FORWARD EXCHANGE RATES IN THE 
ERM . . . . . . . 
. 4 0 EXCHANGE RATES 
OF THE GREEK 
DRACHMA AND THE PORTUGUESE ESCUDO . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . 
4 2 ECU FINANCIAL MARKETS 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . 
44 ORGANISATION CHART FOR THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 62 1 Whenever tables and charts provide 
aggregate measures for 
the Community, the ERM and narrow band members, the measures 
are based on countries' participation in 1991. The aggregate measures 
are weighted averages. INTRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT This is the first 
Annual Report of the Committee of Governors on 
its activities and 
on the monetary and financial conditions 
in the Community. The Report 
has been 
prepared in accordance with the Committee's mandate as laid down in the amended Council 
Decision of 
12th March 1990. It covers developments 
during the first one and a 
half years of Stage 
One of Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU), which started on 1st July 1990. Monetary policy co-ordination - the principal 
task of the Committee of Governors The Committee 
of Governors was 
established in 1964 and has 
since then been 
the principal 
forum for co-operation between 
the central banks of 
the EEC Member States. On the entry 
into Stage One of 
EMU the role 
of the 
Committee was considerably strengthened and 
its tasks 
were extended. In particular, additional 
emphasis was placed on the promotion 
of the co-ordination of monetary policies 
with the aim of achieving price stability as 
a necessary condition for 
the proper 
functioning of the European Monetary System (EMS). Although during Stages One and 
Two responsibility for monetary policy remains with 
the national authorities, 
the emphasis on co-ordination in the Committee's mandate reflects the recognition that both 
changes in the economic environment of the Community 
and the objective of creating 
EMU have greatly 
increased the need for compatible monetary 
policies. The gradual realisation 
of a single 
market, in particular the liberalisation 
of capital movements and 
the rapid 
integration of financial markets, 
and the 
enhanced stability of exchange 
rates within the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
(ERM) of the EMS have 
strengthened the interdependence between national 
monetary policies. As a result, the effectiveness of 
monetary policy in Member States is 
becoming increasingly 
dependent upon central bank co-operation. Moreover, the 
agreement to complete EMU within a limited 
number of years has made the 
achievement of a 
high degree of economic 
and financial convergence even more 
urgent. Gearing monetary policies to 
the attainment of 
a stable 
level of prices throughout the Community 
constitutes a crucial element 
in paving the way for 
a successful 
EMU. The co-ordination 
framework Since the start of Stage One further progress 
has been made in co-ordinating monetary policies, 
reflecting the growing consensus on 
the role of monetary 
policy and improvements in the technical aspects 
of the 
co-ordination process. There is a firmly shared conviction in the Community 
that the primary objective of monetary 
policy is to attain 
price stability, as 
a precondition for 
sustainable economic 
growth and social equity. The 
attainment of 
price stability serves as the 
guiding principle for 
the orientation of monetary 
policy in all Community countries 
and the maintenance of price stability 
will be the primary 
objective of monetary policy in full EMU. In order to 
promote this 
common aim, the Committee of Governors has reinforced its efforts 
to improve the co-ordination 
of monetary policies. In particular, as 
a complement 
to the monthly monitoring 
of current conditions 
in financial and foreign exchange markets, 
the Committee 
has introduced 
an annual forward-looking assessment of Member States' monetary policy 
intentions. This 
ex ante assessment has 
the purpose 
of evaluating their mutual 
compatibility before 
final decisions 
on the course 
of monetary policy for the following year 
are taken 
by the national authorities. This exercise is 
followed by regular reviews of the 
outturn in comparison with policy targets to assess the continued appropriateness of 
the stance of national policies in the light of evolving 
developments. In order to base these examinations 
on firmer 
technical grounds, the Committee has begun 
building a 
common analytical framework which uses a system of indicators and common 
assumptions on prospective economic 
developments, and 
which also involves 
the first steps towards improving the 
consistency, to the extent necessary, 
of the 
national definitions of 
broad monetary aggregates. Although still 
in the early stages of 
development, this technical framework has already 
proved valuable. The need 
to strengthen the co-ordination process was heightened by the fact that monetary policies 
have operated in an environment where the authorities' 
commitment to maintain current 
ERM parities has become 
increasingly credible 
to financial market 
participants. This was 
a significant development, given 
events in this period 
which might have 
led to acute 
tensions: the volatility of 
the dollar, the Gulf 
War, developments in Eastern Europe 
and the divergence of 
cyclical positions within 
the Community. Several factors may have 
contributed to the stabilisation 
of exchange rate 
expectations: the political momentum towards 
EMU; the trend towards more convergent inflation rates; 
the narrowing of current-account 
imbalances; and 
a long 
period without a general realignment, reflecting 
the pursuit of 
a "hard currency option" as a means of implementing 
anti-inflationary monetary 
policies. As exchange rate expectations 
became more stable, 
there was a narrowing of 
interest rate differentials 
between Community currencies. As a result, the financial linkages 
within the Community were reinforced and 
the room for independent national 
monetary policies was further restricted. The co-ordinated setting of monetary policies 
for 1991 In the first 
ex ante assessment of the 
orientation of national monetary policies for 1991, 
the Committee of 
Governors agreed 
that the stance of national 
policies should remain geared towards a further 
reduction of inflationary pressures. 
This assessment took into account 
the less favourable growth 
prospects in many Community 
countries, the 
potential repercussions of German unification, and 
the uncertainties in the international environment 
associated with the conflict 
in the Gulf. The execution of monetary policy was broadly in line with the intentions. Most Member States 
registered a 
slowdown in monetary growth, generally meeting 
the quantified targets where 
these were set. At the same time, interest 
rate differentials narrowed markedly, 
with rates converging towards 
the German level, 
which even though increasing 
during the year, remained the lowest in the Community. While monetary policies 
were in line with the course endorsed by the Committee of Governors, results in 1991 were 
mixed (see 
Summary Table). Although for the Community as a whole the rate of inflation - measured in terms of the weighted 
consumer price 
index - declined from 5.7% in 1990 to 5.1% in 1991, with some narrowing 
in inflation differentials, 
this outcome 
is still far 
from the final goal of price stability. 
Moreover, not 
only was inflation in 1991 appreciably higher than 
the average rate 
achieved over 
the 1986 to 1988 
period, but the result 
was also disappointing 
in the light 
of less inflationary external conditions and 
weaker economic activity 
within the Community than had 
been anticipated 
at the time when monetary jUMMARY TABLE: ECONOMIC AND 
FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS IN THE COMMUNITY a) Source: BIS and 
National Data REAL GDP CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION COMPENSATION PER EMPLOYEE CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE 
C) GENERAL GOVERNMENT 
BORROWING REQUIREMENT SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE 
d) LONG-TERM INTEREST RATE 
e) a) All figures are EEC weighted averages. 
b) Estimates c) A negative 
number indicates a deficit. d) 3-month domestic money 
market rate. e) Long-term government 
or public sector bond rate. 1986-88 average 1989 percentage change 
over the previous year 1990 3.2 3.6 6.1 1991 b) 3.6 5.3 6.2 per cent of nominal GDP/GNP 2.8 5.7 7.5 0.8 4.0 1.1 5.1 7.1 0.0 2.9 per cent -0.2 4.5 8.7 9.2 -0.9 4.3 10.9 9.9 11.6 
11.2 10.9 10.3 policy intentions were formulated (see Chart 
1). In addition, the decline 
in the average rate 
of price increase for 
the Community as a whole was largely a reflection of a substantial 
fall in inflation in the United Kingdom, while 
other countries 
with high inflation 
in 1990 made only limited progress. 
Furthermore, inflation rose 
in Germany and the Netherlands, the two Member 
States with traditionally the lowest rates. 
However, some 
countries succeeded 
in maintaining relatively low rates of inflation. The growing 
confidence in the prevailing exchange rate 
parities was beneficial for business decisions and contributed 
to stable conditions 
in financial 
markets. It also allowed countries 
with sluggish economic activity and 
low or rapidly 
falling rates 
of inflation to reduce interest 
rates in the first 
half of 1991 towards German levels. However, there were 
limits on the extent 
to which interest rates 
could be 
lowered without 
creating exchange rate 
tensions. This became evident 
in the second half 
of 1991, after interest 
rate differentials 
within the Community 
had narrowed to historically 
low levels. At the 
end of 
1991, interest rates 
had to be raised in a number of countries to signal the commitment to 
maintaining exchange rate 
stability. Constraints 
on the scope 
for independent interest 
rate changes have also 
been faced 
by countries experiencing strong inflationary pressures, 
making it difficult to keep interest rates 
at levels considered 
high enough to fight inflation. The importance of appropriate fiscal 
policies and waae developments Both the 
resilience of inflation and the conflict 
sometimes experienced between 
the objective 
of exchange rate stability 
and domestic 
considerations highlight 
the importance 
of other factors which affect price performance, notably fiscal 
policies and wage developments. Budget deficits remained excessively high in a number of 
Member States 
in 1991. Indeed, the weighted average 
of general government borrowing 
requirements in the Community rose 
sharply in 1990, despite the fact that 
low deficits were 
maintained in several countries. 
Plans for 
budgetary consolidation in 1991 were seldom fully met, 
and as a result the 
average deficit 
remained well above 4% of GDP. 
As recent experience has 
shown, fiscal imbalances 
are not just a matter of national concern. Changes in demand and 
interest rates 
generated by excessively expansionary 
national fiscal policies 
may affect economic and financial conditions throughout 
the Community 
and complicate the task of monetary policy in pursuing price stability. 
Large budget deficits within the Community have contributed to 
high real interest 
rates, which have 
dampened private investment and have reduced long-run growth potential. Concerns also apply to labour market developments. Nominal 
wages have continued 
to grow rapidly in the Community 
in 1991, 
increasing on 
average by more than 
7%, in spite of generally weaker demand conditions 
and rising unemployment. In this situation the co-ordination of monetary policies is not sufficient on its own to bring about price 
stability. If more significant progress is to be achieved in fighting inflation 
and creating a 
greater degree of economic and financial 
convergence, the national authorities 
will not only have to rein back fiscal deficits where 
they are excessive, but strong efforts should 
also be made to 
contain wage 
pressures. While these considerations apply to 
all Member 
States, they are particularly important in those which play a pivotal role in shaping the economic and financial conditions 
in the Community. Lessons for 
1992 The experience 
of the first eighteen months 
of Stage One 
was a valuable element in the assessment of the appropriate course 
of monetary policy in 1992. When reviewing national policy intentions and targets for 
the current year, the Committee of Governors was in 
full agreement 
that the thrust of the overall stance 
should be 
to promote 
a further decline in 
inflation in the Community. The monetary policies envisaged 
by the national authorities were 
considered to 
be consistent with this aim and should provide a significant anti-inflationary impetus. However, this appraisal 
was contingent upon the assumption that 
the fiscal consolidation 
and the 
moderation in labour cost pressures expected 
in 1992 would indeed be realised. The fulfilment 
of these expectations is crucial since the 
effectiveness of monetary policies in delivering a stable 
price level in the Community is heavily dependent 
upon adequate support 
from fiscal and other policies 
- especially given 
the desire to safeguard exchange rate stability within the Community 
and the more limited 
room for countries 
to set interest rates 
with a view to domestic economic conditions. 
Indeed, there is an urgent need in many Community 
countries to contain 
cost pressures arising from 
excessive wage 
claims, to adjust 
the policy 
mix by reducing fiscal 
deficits and to 
implement supply-side measures in 
order to render market forces more 
effective. Determined efforts in these fields 
are not only crucial 
if further 
progress towards price stability and a 
resumption of sustainable 
economic growth 
are to 
be achieved in 1992, but also to promote the degree 
of economic convergence which is necessary to 
underpin the 
existing ERM central parities 
in the longer run and to demonstrate the resolve to meet 
the conditions 
for entry into Stage Three 
of EMU. The first part of the Report focuses on the work of the Committee of Governors. In the first Chapter 
the activities of 
the Committee are described in greater detail. The second 
Chapter reviews the 
financial and monetary developments 
in the Community 
since the beginning of Stage One 
of EMU. The third Chapter outlines the main features 
of the new monetary institutions to 
be established in accordance with the Treaty on European Union. The second part of 
the Report provides 
an overview of the structure and organisation of 
the Committee of 
Governors. PART A MOhETARY ISSUES AND THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
I. ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS Since the 
beginning of Stage One, the Committee of Governors has 
taken further 
steps to strengthen the co-ordination 
of monetary policies. In addition, the Committee has focused 
on: the monitoring of developments 
in the European Monetary System 
(EMS); the institutional requirements 
for the second and third stages 
of EMU; issues in the field of banking 
supervision and 
payment systems; and relationships with non-Community countries. The Committee 
was assisted by the Committee of Alternates, the sub-committees and working groups, 
and the 
Secretariat and Economic Unit (see Part B of the 
Report). 1. CO-ORDINATION OF MONETARY POLICIES 
The Committee 
of Governors has strengthened 
its efforts to promote the co-ordination 
of monetary policies, in accordance with its revised mandate of March 1990 (see Annex I). To this end, it has 
established a common 
framework for the 
monitoring of monetary policies, which includes regular examinations 
based on a set of commonly agreed 
and mutually consistent 
indicators. Particular emphasis has been 
placed on the enhancement 
of the forward-looking analysis 
of economic and monetary trends 
in the Community. 
Each autumn, before the final decisions 
by the national authorities, 
the Committee assesses 
the national monetary 
policy intentions for the following year. This "ex anten exercise involves, in particular, an appraisal of whether the intended 
intermediate objectives of national 
monetary policies are mutually compatible and consistent 
with the objective of downward convergence 
of inflation rates throughout the Community, taking into account 
the desire to preserve exchange rate stability. 
The forward-looking 
assessments are supplemented by "ex post" surveillance exercises in which developments 
in economic and monetary 
indicators are compared with earlier projections. 
The causes 
of deviations are examined as well as the need and scope for corrective measures. 
In addition, the Committee 
of Governors has continued its practice of 
studying in detail, once a year, developments in public finance and their 
implications for the conduct of monetary policies. 
The anten and "ex post" exercises make use 
of a set of commonly agreed indicators 
and, in addition, allow each central 
bank to take into account the assessment of the other Community central banks. To ensure the broad consistency of the national projections, 
the forward-looking appraisal 
is now based on a common set 
of assumptions on economic and financial 
prospects outside 
the Community. Attention is also being devoted to the development of Community-wide economic indicators, 
to an evaluation of 
the comparability of monetary statistics, and to 
improvements in the analytical framework for 
interpreting monetary aggregates and their 
domestic and foreign counterparts. In the latter respects, a first 
step towards improving 
the consistency of the definitions 
of broad money stocks has 
been made, paying due regard 
to differences in national financial 
structures and behaviour 
and to 
the need to maintain a 
stable relationship 
between national 
monetary aggregates and the final goals of monetary policy (see Annex 11). Some of the Member States have already 
decided to adopt the revised definitions. 
2. MONITORING EMS DEVELOPMENTS 
One of the main tasks of the Committee of Governors 
is to oversee the operation of 
the EMS. This activity includes 
the joint monitoring of current exchange 
rate and monetary policy 
developments, as 
well as the examination of all the other factors 
affecting the 
functioning of the EMS exchange rate 
mechanism. The monitoring follows a 
procedure which was established by the so-called BaslelNyborg agreement of 1987. Each month, exchange rate 
trends are examined and instruments 
used to counteract exchange market 
tensions are reviewed. This review takes account 
of economic developments and the agreement that the available 
instruments to reduce tension (intervention, 
exchange rate movements 
within the band and interest rate changes) 
should be used flexibly and concertedly to promote intra-ERM exchange rate stability. Following the move 
to Stage One 
of EMU, the Committee of Governors has 
supplemented the monthly 
monitoring exercise 
with an annual examination of the 
functioning of the EMS. The first 
examination of this kind took 
place in December 1991 and covered all 
aspects of EMS operations, 
as well as current and prospective policy issues. - 12 - Developments in the use of the private 
ECU have been monitored on 
an annual basis since 1984. 
These examinations include 
assessments of the monetary implications of the growing financial use 
of the ECU, the compatibility of measures taken 
by national and Community authorities and the significance of legal and administrative obstacles to the use of the private ECU. The importance 
of these examinations has increased given 
the rapid expansion of the market (see Chapter 
11, section 2.5) and the 
transformation of the 
present ECU basket 
into the single currency in Stage Three of 
EMU. 3. WORK RELATED TO THE MOVE 
TO THE FINAL STAGE OF 
EMU In June 1989, at its meeting 
in Madrid, the European Council asked the competent 
bodies of the 
Community, including the Committee of Governors, to carry out the preparatory work for the 
organisation of an Intergovernmental Conference to lay down the subsequent stages 
of EMU. In accordance with this mandate, the Committee of Governors submitted to the Intergovernmental Conference on EMU, on 27th November 1990, its proposal 
for a Statute of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) 
and of the 
European Central 
Bank (ECB). In the course of the Intergovernmental Conference, the Committee 
of Governors added provisions covering more 
technical aspects, as well as for 
the arrangements for the transition to 
the final stage of EMU. Furthermore, on 30th October 1991, the Committee of Governors submitted its proposal 
for the Statute of the European Monetary 
Institute (EMI). In addition to this 
preparatory work, the Committee of Governors followed the developments 
at the 
Intergovernmental Conference closely and provided advice in the areas of its competence. 
In accordance with the consultation procedure foreseen in Article 
102 A 
of the EC Treaty, in November 1991, the Committee expressed 
its opinion on the Dutch Presidency's proposal for a Treaty on EMU. The Committee 
of Governors has noted with satisfaction that its preparatory work was well received by the Intergovernmental Conference and that the texts agreed 
upon by the Heads of State 
or of Government in Maastricht in December 1991 reflected closely 
the proposals of the 
Committee (see Chapter 
111). 4. ISSUES IN THE FIELD OF BANKING SUPERVISION AND 
PAYMENT SYSTEMS The revised mandate 
requires the 
Committee of Governors to hold consultations on those issues affecting the 
stability of financial institutions and markets 
which fall within the competence of the central banks. In this context, the Committee 
has examined certain issues 
arising in the field of 
banking supervision and payment 
systems. In the banking supervisory 
field, the Committee 
of Governors has considered a range 
of institution-specific aspects. In particular, the closure of BCCI 
has led the Committee 
to review the implications of this case for 
international banking supervision in conjunction with the competent supervisory 
bodies. In addition, work centred on two major topics. The first concerned the supervision of conglomerates containing a 
bank. In particular, the possible lack of transparency of a 
group's structure and operations can make it 
difficult for 
supervisors to 
take a group-wide 
financial view. This is particularly important given 
the possible risks 
of contagion from problems arising in one part of a conglomerate. A need 
was identified for banking supervisors to 
have discussions with other regulators, especially with those supervising insurance and securities 
markets. The other main theme has been 
the definition of a common 
understanding on the application 
of the Second Banking 
Co-ordination Directive, which 
is due to come into force on 1st January 1993. Before 
this date, a number 
of practical problems need to be resolved. These concern 
the respective future responsibilities of supervisors both in the countries where banking institutions are 
operating and in those where their head 
office is located. 
In this context, valuable technical assistance 
has been 
provided by the "Groupe de Contact" an informal group of 
senior EEC 
banking supervisors. 
In the area of pawlent systems, a number 
of aspects have 
been studied by the Committee of Governors; part of this work is 
currently being prepared by a working group 
which has been 
established on an ad hoc basis. The first 
issue concerns the 
design and operation 
of the ECU Clearing and Settlement 
System, in particular the 
question of whether current procedures 
satisfy the minimum 
standards laid down as a result of the G-10 work on interbank netting schemes. Prior to their 
implementation, the Committee of 
Governors examined the 
intermediation facilities 
provided by the BIS and 
by some national central banks to 
ensure a smooth operation 
of the 
daily clearing. The second aspect relates to the development of payment systems in the context of the 
Single Market and against the 
background of EMU. Work currently being performed is essentially of 
an exploratory nature and 
the Committee of Governors expects to draw some preliminary 
conclusions in the next few months. In addition, the Committee of Governors 
expressed its views on 
the Commission's Discussion Paper "Making Payments in the Internal Market" 
(COM(90)447). Further discussions are now taking place in the Commission's Consultative Group 
on which the Committee of Governors 
is represented by delegates from national central banks. RELATIONSHIPS WITH CENTRAL 
BANKS OUTSIDE THE COMMUNITY 
The Committee 
of Governors 
has continued 
to promote the co-operation with respect to 
developments in exchange markets 
between Community central 
banks and 
the central banks of the 
United States, Canada, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, 
Austria and Switzerland. This co-operation 
provides an important channel of 
information and concerns the pooling of 
data on exchange market developments, intervention and other 
official foreign exchange 
transactions in the so-called "concertation 
proceduren. Moreover, the 
Committee of 
Governors has continued the arrangements with Norges Bank agreed 
in 1984, which provide for regular 
consultations on matters of common interest. In December 1990, following 
the decision taken by the Norwegian authorities to 
peg their currency to 
the ECU, the 
Community central banks agreed 
to extend the bilateral 
co-operation with Norges Bank and concluded bilateral 
swap agreements 
governed by uniform conditions. These 
swap agreements, 
which were renewed at their maturity on 31st December 1991, give Norges Bank 
access to short-term funds for 
intervention purposes 
up to 
the equivalent 
of ECU 2 billion. 
A number of countries outside 
the EMS have established unilateral 
links with the ECU since the start of 
Stage One. Norway (as from 22nd October 1990). Sweden (17th May 1991) and Finland (7th June 
1991) unilaterally pegged their currencies 
to the ECU. With the Austrian Schilling pegged to the Deutsche Mark for many 
years, the move by the three Scandinavian countries 
extended further the 
zone of stable exchange 
rate parities in Europe. 6. CO-OPERATION WITH 
OTHER COMMUNITY BODIES 
In the performance of its tasks and 
functions, the Committee of Governors has 
collaborated with other Community bodies. 
Firstly, the Chairman of the Committee of Governors has attended the Council 
meetings devoted to the multilateral surveillance of member countries' economic policies and 
expressed the 
Committee's views on the consistency 
between monetary and other economic 
policies. In addition, the Governors participated in the informal ECOFIN Council meetings. 
Secondly, the Chairman was invited in March 1991 to attend a meeting of the European Parliament Committee 
on economic and monetary matters and industrial policy. The Chairman informed 
the Committee of the Governors' work on the Statute of the ESCB and 
of the ECB 
as well as on the measures taken 
to strengthen monetary 
policy co-ordination. Thirdly, close co-operation 
with the Commission of the European Communities has continued. Commission representatives attended the meetings of the Committee of Governors and of the Committee 
of Alternates, as well as most of the meetings 
of the sub-committees 
and working groups. Fourthly, the Committee of Governors has contributed to the 
work of the Committee 
on monetary, financial and balance-of-payments statistics which was created by a Council Decision 
in February 1991. A member of the Secretariat has permanent observer status 
on this Committee, whose work 
aims at improving the consistency of statistical data. 
Finally, the Committee of Governors has closely followed 
the work of the Monetary Committee. 
Links with this Committee are 
ensured by the central bank representatives, who 
in most cases are the Alternates 
of the 
Governors. 11. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
AND MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION 
1. THE ECONOMIC BACKGROUND TO MONETARY POLICY 
After the 
strong upswing in the late 1980s, economic growth in the Community as a 
whole has slowed down sharply over 
the last 
two years. However, there have 
been marked differences 
in the experience of individual 
countries. Whereas economic conditions 
in western Germany 
remained buoyant, growth decelerated 
elsewhere in the Community (see Table 
1). Nevertheless, inflation, which had risen in most countries in the period of rapid demand 
growth, is 
proving hard 
to eradicate (see 
Table 2). During 1991, the average inflation rate 
in the Community fell, although 
in many countries 
the decline was quite modest, 
and in some traditionally low-inflation 
countries inflation 
quickened. Economic 
conditions in the rest of the 
world, as well as German unification 
and other factors internal to 
the Community, account for 
these developments. 
1.1 External environment Since the middle 
of 1990, world 
economic activity has weakened 
more sharply than first expected, 
thus reducing 
the demand for 
Community exports and dampening growth in 
the Community. As private sector confidence 
was dented by the Gulf crisis, 
the United States 
economy slipped into recession in late 1990 and early 1991. Signs of a 
subsequent turnaround have been uneven 
and fragile: indications of some 
improvement have often 
been shortly followed 
by other signals suggesting protracted 
weakness. The 
resulting uncertainty 
surrounding prospects 
for US monetary policy and 
expected interest rate differentials against 
other major currencies 
triggered sharp swings in the dollar exchange rate. In the event, slow 
monetary growth, 
as well as other signs that inflationary pressures 
were abating, led the Federal Reserve to ease monetary 
policy on a number of occasions throughout 
the period, 
reducing short-term interest rates to 
the present low level. Elsewhere, the economic cycle in Japan lagged behind 
that of the North American 
economies and has been less pronounced, while 
in EFTA markets, 
which account for 
a greater proportion 
of Community exports than the United States 
and Japan combined, 
demand conditions have been 
subdued. Eastern Europe accounts 
for only 
a small share 
of Community countries' trade at present, and hence the reform 
process and the 
problems of the 
former USSR have 
had relatively little 
direct economic impact 
on the TABLE 1: DEVELOPMENTS IN REAL GDP 
Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: 
OECD a) Estimates b) GNP TABLE 2: DEVELOPMENTS IN CONSUMER PRICE 
INFLATION Source: BIS; National Data Belgium Denmark Germany (western) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal 
United Kingdom EEC : average ERM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States Japan 12 months Dec.90 3.5 1.9 2.8 22.8 6.5 3.4 2.7 6.6 4.4 2.7 13.7 9.3 5.8 5.3 4.0 6.1 3.8 percentage change over 
the to Dec.91 2.8 2.3 4.2 17.8 5.5 3.1 3.6 
6.1 2.6 4.9 9.6 
4.5 4.8 4.5 4.3 3.1 
2.7 1986-88 average 1.3 4.1 0.5 17.7 6.3 2.8 3.0 
5.2 0.6 0.0 10.3 4.2 3.6 3.2 2.5 3.2 0.5 previous 1989 3.1 4.8 2.8 13.7 6.8 3.6 4.0 6.3 3.4 1.1 12.6 7.8 5.3 5.0 3.9 4.8 2.3 year 1990 3.5 2.6 2.7 20.4 6.7 3.4 3.4 6.5 3.7 2.5 13.4 9.5 5.7 5.3 3.9 5.4 3.1 - 1991 3.2 2.4 
3.5 18.9 5.9 3.1 3.2 
6.4 3.1 3.9 11.4 5.9 5.1 4.7 4.2 4.3 3.3 Community. However, given 
the geo-political ties between the 
regions and 
prospects of growing 
economic integration, Community 
financial markets have 
from time to time been 
affected by developments in the eastern 
bloc. The slowdown in the world 
economy has contributed to a reduction in global inflation. Non-oil commodity prices fell sharply 
in the second half of 
1990 to their lowest level for 
around three 
years and remained 
subdued through 1991. The oil 
price hike in the autumn of 
1990 was short-lived, and 
in 1991 the average dollar price 
was only a little higher 
than the level 
preceding the Gulf crisis. Furthermore, profit margins 
on traded manufactured goods have 
been squeezed, as companies have 
tried to maintain market 
shares on both domestic and export 
markets. Weak 
world trade prices have 
helped to moderate inflation 
in the Community. 1.2 German unification The unification 
of Germany 
in the second half of 1990 has had a 
profound economic impact, not 
only in Germany, but also in the rest 
of the Community. Unification has given 
rise to a large fiscal expansion to 
support incomes and 
to encourage investment 
in eastern Germany during 
the difficult adjustment period. Output in eastern Germany has plummeted, although 
tentative signs have recently emerged that a 
pick-up is 
underway. Despite the collapse in domestic production, eastern German demand rose 
sharply following unification, 
financed largely 
by government transfers. This surge in demand came 
at a time 
when the western German 
economy was already operating at a high level 
of capacity. Consequently, the 
stimulus not only boosted output in Germany but also supported activity in other Member States. The surge in demand led to a sharp 
increase in German imports 
and a 
diversion of exports 
in 1990 and the first half of 
1991 and, as 
a result, all Community countries have 
improved their bilateral 
trade position with 
Germany, in some cases by well over 1% of GDP. 
At the same 
time, the strong 
demand in Germany fuelled 
domestic inflationary pressures. 
These pressures have been countered 
by a series 
of increases in interest rates, which have 
also affected interest rate 
conditions elsewhere 
in the Community. 
1.3 Economic performance and 
nominal convernence in the Community In spite of the surge 
in output in western Germany, the 
cyclical downturn in the Community as a whole has proved sharper than foreseen in mid-1990. This reflected the marked slowdown in external markets and weaker 
domestic spending, as real 
interest rates remained 
high and private sector 
confidence recovered 
only slowly after the 
Gulf War. Following six years 
of relatively strong growth, real GDP 
in the Community increased by only 1.1% in 1991, the lowest rate 
since 1982. As activity weakened, unemployment 
in the Community began to 
rise. Developments at the 
aggregate level mask 
an increased cyclical 
divergence between the individual Member 
States. Although growth weakened 
through 1991, the level 
of economic 
activity in western Germany has 
remained high, in marked contrast 
to the recession experienced in the United Kingdom. 
In the other 
countries, growth has 
slowed sharply, although 
it remained above 2% in Spain, Luxembourg and Portugal. The only exception 
to the 
slowdown was Greece where 
economic activity recovered 
marginally. Since the 
start of Stage One, 
the average rate 
of inflation and 
the dispersion across 
countries have narrowed modestly. 
For 1991 as a whole, consumer price inflation in the Community 
on a weighted basis fell only to around 5%, well 
above the 
rates of under 
4% experienced in the period from 1986 to 1988. 
Although external influences and the slowdown in economic activity have 
generally been 
conducive to inflation reduction, 
persistently strong growth 
in wages and inadequate fiscal consolidation in 
many countries hindered more 
significant progress (see 
Tables 3 and 4). In addition, structural rigidities, including insufficient flexibility 
in labour markets, continue to hamper the disinflationary 
process. In the high-inflation countries, the 
rate of increase of prices 
was much lower in sectors open to foreign 
competition than in the more sheltered parts of the 
economy. The convergence 
of price performance in the Community has 
been partly of 
the wrong 
kind, as inflation 
rates have risen significantly 
in Germany and 
the Netherlands, the Community countries with the best historical record in terms of 
price stability. This 
deterioration reflected a marked 
pick-up in wage settlements as well 
as increases in taxes and 
other public sector prices. 
With the exception of Italy, where 
the average rate of price increase 
in 1991 was 
essentially unchanged, the other 
Community countries 
succeeded in lowering inflation in 1991, although to 
varying extents. In the five countries (Belgium, Denmark, France, 
Ireland and Luxembourg) which, 
together with Germany and the Netherlands, 
had relatively low rates of inflation in 1990, the improvement was limited to a maximum of 0.5 percentage point and 
in most cases 
was less. Denmark had 
the TABLE 3: WAGE DEVELOPMENTS 
(Compensation per Employee) a) Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: OECD Belgium Denmark Germany (western) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom EEC : average EM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States c) Japan c) a) Whole economy; increase in nominal 
terms. b) Estimates 
c) Data covers the business sector 
only, and may thus not 
be directly comparable 
with the data for the 
EEC countries. previous year 1991 b) 5.4 3.2 6.2 16.1 8.7 4.7 7.0 8.3 4.7 4.4 17.8 8.2 7.1 6.8 6.1 4.0 3.8 percentage 1986-88 average 2.9 5.7 3.2 13.9 7.7 4.6 5.4 8.2 3.7 2.2 17.6 8.2 6.1 5.8 4.9 4.3 3.2 change 1989 3.6 3.8 3.0 17.8 6.3 
4.6 6.5 8.7 6.5 0.8 16.4 9.1 6.2 5.9 4.9 2.9 3.9 over the 
1990 5.9 3.4 4.7 20.0 7.9 5.4 3.8 10.4 5.2 3.3 18.4 9.7 7.5 7.1 6.3 3.8 4.5 TABLE 4: GENERAL GOVERNMENT BORROWING REQUIREMENTS a) a) Negative numbers indicate a 
fiscal surplus. 
b) Estimates c) Up to 1989 western Germany only; 
1990 on the basis of all German borrowing requirement over 
western German GDP; 1991 on the basis of figures of all 
Germany. lowest rate of inflation 
in 1991 at 
2.4%. Elsewhere, against 
a background 
of weak economic activity, inflation fell 
dramatically in the United Kingdom following 
sterling's entry into the ERM; in Spain, the rate declined steadily, 
but only slowly; and in Greece and Portugal, average inflation in 1991 dropped by between 1 and 2 percentage points, although 
a much sharper decline 
was recorded through the year. The trend towards a 
gradual reduction in fiscal deficits 
in the late 1980s 
has been reversed in the past two 
years in some countries. Although the deficit 
remained low in several countries, the combined 
deficit at the general 
government level rose 
from around 3% of Community 
GDP in 1989 to some 4.5% in 1990, and remained 
near that level 
in 1991. The deterioration in budgetary performance can be attributed to several factors: German unification; 
the slowdown in economic growth; and, in some countries, to slippage in the control of government spending. 
Differences in the budgetary positions of Member States 
remain substantial 
(see Chart 2). While five 
countries had general government 
deficits under 3% of GDP in 1991, at the other end of 
the spectrum the 
deficit was around 10% in Italy, and around 
15% in 
Greece. The levels 
of public sector 
debt diverge markedly and 
in three Community countries 
remain above 
100% of GDP. Current-account imbalances in Germany and the 
United Kingdom have 
narrowed markedly 
over the past 
two years (see Table 5). In Germany, the fiscal expansion 
associated with unification has 
absorbed the previously 
large national 
savings surplus, with the 
current account moving from a surplus of almost 
5% of GDP in 1989 to a deficit of over 
1% in 1991. In the United Kingdom, the 
recovery of personal sector savings 
and the 
cutback in corporate investment have 
been reflected 
in a marked decline 
in the current-account deficit. In Greece the deficit fell 
from over 5% of GDP in 
1990 to 2% in 1991. Elsewhere in the Community, a sizable current-account deficit persisted 
in Spain, financed by substantial long-term 
capital inflows attracted by profitable investment opportunities. 
The Netherlands has continued to 
record a large current-account surplus. 
2. MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE 
DEVELOPMENTS In Stage One, although the responsibility for monetary 
policy remains at the national level, the liberalisation of 
capital flows 
and b) General Government 
Borrowing Requirement, 1991 (National Sources) CHART 2: BUDGETARY POSITIONS IN THE 
COMMUNITY (per cent of nominal GDPIGNP) 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 20° PUBLIC 1 40 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 a) Gross Debt 
of General Government, end of 1990 (Commission Sources) BUDGET DEFICIT 
b) DEBT a) - - BE - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - LU . 1 I -5 0 5 10 15 I I I TABLE 5: CURRENT ACCOUNT OF THE BALANCE OF 
PAYMENTS a) Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: OECD Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Germany c) d) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom EEC : average ERM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States c) Japan c) a) Negative numbers indicate a deficit 
b) Estimates c) In per cent of nominal GNP d) Up to June 
1990 western Germany 
only. per 1986-88 average 2.3 -3.2 4.3 -2.9 0.3 -0.2 0.2 -0.1 2.3 
0.9 -1.7 0.8 0.8 1.5 -3.2 3.5 cent of 1989 2.3 -1.1 4.8 -4.7 -2.9 -0.5 1.5 -1.2 3.8 0.4 -4.7 0.0 0.1 1.5 -2.0 2.0 nominal GDP 1990 1.9 1.1 3.1 -5.4 -3.4 -0.7 3.4 -1.3 3.9 -0.1 -3.2 -0.2 -0.1 0.9 -1.7 1.2 1991 b) 
2.0 1.7 -1.2 -2.1 -3.0 -0.5 4.8 -1.7 3.9 -1.1 -1.2 -0.9 -0.8 -0.5 -0.1 2.1 rapid financial integration have 
strengthened the interdependence between national policies 
in the context of the ERM. Most indicators suggest that 
monetary policies have been firm since the start of Stage One and have 
thus generally favoured 
progress towards lower 
inflation in an 
environment of stable exchange rates 
between Community currencies. 
However, in many Member 
States wage and fiscal 
developments have not 
provided sufficient support 
to monetary policy. 2.1 The stance of monetary ~olicy Due to the long and variable lags in the transmission of monetary policy, the monetary 
stance must 
be appraised on the basis of 
medium-run trends. Developments in monetary aggregates and interest rates 
provide useful evidence for this assessment. 
Monetary amregates Growth rates 
of the 
key broad monetary aggregates have 
moderated in most countries over the last 
two years (see 
Table 6). A deceleration is also evident in the broad monetary aggregates which 
have been harmonised 
for the internal use 
of the Committee of 
Governors (see Annex 11). The slowdown in monetary growth, although 
partly reflecting the weakening in 
economic activity, indicates that monetary policies tended 
to exert downward pressure on inflation. In the countries 
which announce targets, monetary growth has 
generally been 
within or close to the published ranges over 
this period 
(see Table 
7). However, in Germany, monetary growth accelerated 
in late 1991, fuelled by buoyant credit 
demand, and as a 
result the target was 
exceeded. In Spain, the overshooting in 1991 partly reflected capital inflows. In an environment of stable exchange rate 
expectations and 
liberalised capital movements, 
these inflows ultimately 
stemmed from the substantial government 
borrowing requirement. 
A similar mechanism 
led to an overshooting in Italy in 1990 and Portugal 
in 1991. Furthermore, shifts in portfolio behaviour, often 
related to financial deregulation and innovation 
or to changes 
in taxation, partly accounted for deviations 
from targets in both directions, 
as experienced in Greece, Spain, France and 
Italy. The 
avoidance of distortions from financial 
shifts was one 
of the important factors behind the revisions in the national definitions 
of broad money in 
several countries. 
TABLE 6: DEVELOPMENTS IN BROAD MONETARY AGGREGATES a) Source: BIS and National 
Data Belgium Denmark Germany b ) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom United States Japan a) National definitions of broad money stocks 
are not suffi- 
ciently similar to be aggregated at the Community 
level (see Annex 11). The following aggregates have been selected: 
Belgium: M4e; Denmark: M National; Germany: M3; Greece: M3; Spain: (new) ALP; France: (new) M3; Ireland: M3; Italy: M2; Netherlands: M3; Portugal: L-; United Kingdom: M4; United States: M2; Japan: M2tCD. b) Up to 
1990, western Germany only. 
4th quarter/4th 1986-88 average 9.8 5.9 6.7 22.4 14.2 8.4 4.8 9.1 4.8 20.3 16.5 6.2 10.2 quarter 1989 10.5 4.3 4.7 23.8 15.3 9.1 4.6 8.8 13.0 7.7 18.9 4.7 10.5 percentage 1990 6.9 8.1 5.6 15.1 
10.4 8.1 16.7 9.9 6.8 16.0 12.1 3.8 9.2 change 1991 7.3 5.7 5.2 7.2 11.3 4.1 5.2 8.3 
5.8 15.0 5.5 2.7 3.1 TABLE 7. MONETARY TARGETS AND OUTTURNS a) A. Countries setting targets for 
money supply 
growth Target 1990 1991 1992 Variable Target Outturn Target outturn Target Germany M3 4-6 5.6 3-5 b) 5.2 3.5-5.5 Greece M3 19-21 14.2 14-16 11.7 
(8.3) e) 9-12 d) Spain M 3 
- - - 7-11 d) ALP 6.5-9.5 11.3 7-11 12.1 (10.9) e) 8-11 d) France M2 3.5-5.5 -0.5 
- - - M3 - - 5-7 d) 4.1 4-6 Italy M2 6-9 9.9 5-8 8.9 5-7 d) Portugal M 3 
- - - - 12-15 d) L - - 11.5 12 15.2 12-16 United Kingdom MO 1-5 2.5 0-4 2.8 December c) - B. Countries setting targets for the domestic source 
of money supply growth r--' Target 1990 1991 1992 Variable Target Outturn Target outturn Target Denmark DMC f) - -0.9 4-7 1.3 4-7 Netherlands Bank's DMC 
f) 6 6 7-8 11.0 7-8 Source: National Data "-" target not set 
a) Targets are set for 
a calendar year (4th 
qrt./4th qrt. or Dec./Dec.) except in the 
UK (March/March). The 1990 and 1991 outturn columns report the corresponding 
growth rate of the respective 
variable. No monetary 
target is set in 
Belgium, Ireland and Luxembourg. b) Revised from 
4-6% at the mid-year target review. 
c) Annualised percentage change 
between the 
base period and 
the last month. 
d) Target refers to a revised definition of the aggregate. e) Figures in 
parentheses show the 1991 
outturn for the revised definition to be used in 1992. f) Domestic money creation 
(Denmark: growth in 
"Lending to residents in domestic currency + Stock of bonds denominated in domestic currency 
- Special deposits". Netherlands: growth in "Lending 
to domestic private 
sector + long-term lending to domestic government 
- domestic non-monetary liabilities"). Interest rates 
In the two years 
prior to Stage One, there had 
been a significant tightening of monetary 
policies in the Community 
to counter the revival 
of inflationary pressure stemming 
from rapid demand growth. 
Through 1988 and 1989, three-month nominal 
interest rates rose 
on average by around 3 percentage points, 
with particularly strong 
increases in the United Kingdom and Spain, where 
the overheating 
of the economy was most pronounced (see Chart 3). The rise 
in short-term rates 
in this period exceeded 
the increase in inflation. In the countries whose currencies participate 
in the narrow 
band of the ERM, short-term rates have remained rather high subsequently. Indeed, in Germany and the Netherlands rates 
have risen 
significantly over 
the eighteen months under 
review. In the other narrow-band members, 
rates in late 1991 had returned to their mid-1990 levels, although 
there had been 
some broadly offsetting swings 
in interest rates during the interim 
(see Chart 4). At the end of 1990, a general upward 
movement in short-term interest rates 
was triggered by concerns about unfavourable 
price movements, arising 
partly from the oil price hike in connection with the Gulf crisis, 
but also from adverse wage developments and widening 
budget deficits, especially in Germany. With oil prices 
returning quickly to 
the pre-Gulf levels 
in early 1991, most 
Community countries sought to 
lower short-term interest rates, although rates 
remained broadly unchanged 
in Germany and the Netherlands, as 
strong inflationary pressures continued. 
In the other countries 
participating in the narrow band, inflationary 
forces were receding and growth 
prospects deteriorating, and, as exchange 
market sentiment supported greater convergence 
in the level of nominal 
interest rates, official interest rates were 
reduced significantly 
towards the lower 
German levels. As a result, interest rate 
differentials vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark declined to 
historically low levels and in some cases were 
largely eliminated 
in the first half of 1991 (see Chart 3). During the second half, the 
persistence of inflationary pressures 
and strong monetary 
growth in Germany led to further increases 
in official interest rates. As foreign exchange market 
sentiment suggested 
that limits to 
the reduction of interest rate differentials 
had been reached, 
the increases in German interest rates 
were accompanied by increases in the other narrow-band 
countries; in some cases interest 
differentials temporarily widened. 
z 2 0, Q) (D W 01 awu owzl- CHART 4: RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN INTEREST RATES BELGIUM DENMARK 3 M. DOMESTIC .-..- BONDS GERMANY I 12 GREECE - 3 M. DOMESTIC BONDS FRANCE - - 3M.DOMEsTIC - .---- BONDS - - - - - - ., - - - - - - - 11111111111 11111111111 11111111111 CHART 4: (continued) IRELAND 13 NETHERLANDS 3 M. DOMESTIC -m--- BONDS P 10 10 UNITED KINGDOM ITALY 15 - 3 M DOMESTIC - --..- BONDS - - - - - - - - - Illllllllll 11111111111 11l11111111 PORTUGAL 17 17 EEC (Weighted avg.) and USA l3 l l3 - EEC. 3 M. DOMESTIC . . 
. . . 
EEC BONDS USA. 3 M. DOMESTIC . - -. . USA: BONDS 4 89 90 91 In the two 
countries - the United 
Kingdom and Spain - whose currencies participate 
in the wide band of the 
ERM and 
where interest rates had risen particularly strongly 
in 1988-89, short-term rates have 
been reduced substantially 
since the start of Stage 
One. The decline 
reflected progress in reducing inflation and, 
in the case of Spain, also 
the strength 
of the 
peseta. In the second half of 
1991, there were signs that 
limits to the narrowing of interest rate 
differentials between the pound sterling and the narrow-band currencies were 
being approached. Outside the ERM, short-term 
rates rose sharply in Portugal and 
Greece in the second half of 1990. Rates have 
remained high through 1991 to signal the 
authorities' determination 
to bring inflation closer to 
the levels elsewhere 
in the Community. 
Long-term interest 
rates in the Community 
had also risen 
in 1988-89, but 
the increases were 
less pronounced than those 
of short-term rates, resulting 
in flatter, and in some cases 
inverted, yield 
curves (see Charts 4 and 5). Between the middle of 
1990 and 
the end of 1991, long-term 
rates fell 
in the narrow-band countries. The decline, however, 
was smallest in Germany and the 
Netherlands and 
hence long-term interest rate 
differentials also narrowed, albeit to 
a lesser extent than the differentials in the money markets. As with short-term rates, long-term 
rates came 
down more sharply in Spain and the United Kingdom. 
Long-term rates have also fallen markedly 
in Portugal. Although various factors 
may influence long-term interest rates, 
their decline suggests that expectations of future inflation 
decreased. Long-term rates have fallen 
further in early 1992. 2.2 Exchange rate 
developments in the ERM The most notable feature of recent exchange 
market developments has been the stability 
of conditions 
within the ERM. This stands 
in marked contrast to the global 
environment of large, and at times erratic, movements of 
the exchange rates of 
third currencies vis-h-vis the ERM currencies (see Chart 
6). Participation in the ERM was extended in October 1990 when the pound sterling joined the 
mechanism, with a fluctuation margin 
of *6%. The ERM has functioned smoothly since 
the start 
of Stage One and the occasional periods of tension have not 
seriously threatened 
the maintenance of central parities. The overall stability 
of the system is all 
the more striking in the light of various 
factors which could have 
resulted CHART5: LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES IN ERM COUNTRIES *) ORIGINAL NARROW BAND COUNTRIES 15 ,., BELGIUM ...... DENMARK - GERMANY - ,,,, FRANCE ............ IRELAND . NETHERLANDS .L. -. . . -. . . 
. . 
. . . * . . 
- OTHER ERM 
COUNTRIES *) Government or public sector bonds 
in more extensive exchange rate tensions. 
These include 
the volatility of the US dollar; the 
considerable uncertainty associated 
with the Gulf crisis; political and economic upheaval 
in Central and Eastern Europe; 
and the divergence between 
the cyclical positions of 
Community countries. 
Possible explanations for the increase 
in stability of 
exchange rates are 
discussed in the next 
section. The behaviour of individual currencies suggests 
that nominal 
interest rate 
differentials have been a 
major factor determining exchange 
rate movements 
in the fluctuation band, with high yielding currencies often 
approaching the upper margin 
(see Chart 
7). In the wide band, 
the Spanish 
peseta remained consistently 
in the upper half of its fluctuation 
margin, sometimes reaching the upper 
intervention rate. In the narrow band, 
the Italian lira 
was often the strongest currency. 
When interest rates 
firmed in Germany during 
the second half of 1990 and again 
in 1991, the Deutsche Mark moved into 
the upper part of the narrow band, 
accompanied by the Dutch guilder and the Belgian 
franc. In contrast, in France and Denmark, where 
the authorities lowered interest rates 
when possible, their respective 
currencies tended to remain 
in the lower part of the 
narrow band. Some exchange rate strains have arisen, however, 
when market participants considered that interest rate 
differentials did not correspond to perceived exchange 
risks. On two occasions, in the summer 
of 1990 and the spring of 1991, high-yielding 
currencies (the Spanish peseta, 
joined in the first instance 
by the Italian lira) were for a time at, or close to, 
their respective upper intervention limits 
against a currency or currencies with relatively low interest rates (the French franc, 
joined in the first instance by the Deutsche Mark 
and the Dutch guilder). In late 1990, the currencies of 
some ERM countries in relatively weak cyclical positions came 
under downward 
pressure as the Deutsche 
Mark strengthened in response to 
higher German interest rates 
and the weakness 
of the US dollar. Finally, there were tensions in late 1991 related to the 
increase in German rates. Episodes of tension were 
quickly countered 
by the monetary authorities 
by intra-marginal interventions, 
interest rate changes and movements in the band. 2.3 Factors behind ERM stability A major reason for 
the smooth operation of the 
ERM over this 
period has been the 
assessment by market participants that prospects for the maintenance of exchange rate parities had improved. 
This development 
is - CHART 7: POSITIONS OF ERM CURRENCIES Weekly averages 
of percentage deviations 
from central rates a) 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 1 1 0 0 -1 -1 1989 1990 1991 a) The distance between 
two currencies represents 
the percentage difference between 
their market exchange rate and their bilateral 
central parity. 
The Spanish peseta and 
the British pound entered the 
ERM wide band in June 1989 
and October 1990, respectively. 
b) In January 1990, the Italian lira 
entered the narrow band, 
and its central rate was adjusted downwards, 
while keeping unchanged 
the lower limit of the band. 
in turn linked to the 
effective policy 
measures taken 
by the national central banks to counter periods 
of tensions. As market participants expected authorities to 
counteract exchange 
market tensions, 
the incentive to take foreign exchange 
positions in favour of a 
realignment was 
reduced. As a result, the 
stabilising properties of 
the system were reinforced. While difficult 
to assess and 
to quantify, evidence from 
two sources suggests that market 
expectations of a 
realignment diminished in the period under review. A first 
indicator, which sheds some light 
on short-run expectations, is 
the forward 
exchange rate. If the forward exchange rate is 
outside the 
maximum range allowed 
by the fluctuation band, 
this can be interpreted 
as signalling the expectations 
of a realignment over the relevant 
time horizon. 
Indeed, the above indicator using 
the twelve-month forward 
rates vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark suggests that market 
expectations of a realignment 
have been 
the lowest since the inception 
of the EMS (see Chart 
8). A second indicator of exchange 
rate expectations is provided by long-term interest rate differentials, 
which supply information on the credibility of parities 
over a longer period. Although the differential 
should be 
interpreted with caution because of 
the different 
rnaturities, fiscal treatment and 
liquidity of the bonds being compared, the progressive 
reduction in long-term interest rate differentials vis-8-vis the Deutsche Mark during Stage 
One again suggests stronger 
market confidence 
in the maintenance of central parities in the ERM (see Chart 
5). Strengthened market 
confidence may be ascribed 
to several factors, some reflecting structural 
and political developments as well as 
others of 
a conjunctural nature. Firstly, the absence of a 
general realignment since 
January 1987 demonstrates policy-makers' growing 
awareness of the 
potential drawbacks of changes 
in parities, both 
in terms of the resulting 
inflationary stimulus 
and the damage to the credibility 
of their "hard currency policyn. Moreover, the removal 
of capital controls and 
the political momentum towards EMU have further 
added to confidence 
in the authorities* commitment 
to exchange rate stability. Secondly, differences 
in inflation performance in the Community have declined, and 
the largest current-account imbalances 
in countries participating 
in the ER. have narrowed. Finally, market 
perceptions of the impact 
of German unification 
tended to reduce 
the relative strength 
of the Deutsche Mark 
in the ERM for much of this 
period, easing the pressures on other currencies associated 
7 V) 2 G , m .c IS) 0 m C 'D 9 5 C so > c 0 'D .= a, m IS) = m ti - c 2 a, - U - & S Q% m a, z a, Q 2 5 IS) UJ 6': 5 2 3 Q 2 c 2 L% .2 a, fn = E { .- - a, a, g: - with the maintenance 
of high interest 
rates in Germany. However, the Deutsche Mark regained its relative strength in the ERM in the second half of 1991, as the Deutsche Bundesbank raised official 
interest rates twice to 
reaffirm its determination 
to continue a stability-oriented 
monetary policy. Monetary authorities have also fostered stability 
by reacting quickly and 
effectively to episodes of exchange 
market tensions. Policy 
responses complied with the principles of the 
1987 Basle-Nyborg Agreement, 
which calls on the authorities to make flexible 
and co-ordinated use of interest rate changes, intervention, 
and the scope 
for movement within 
the band. The relative importance 
of the instruments employed differed from 
country to country, depending on 
the authorities' 
assessment of the source of the tensions and 
of the likely impact of the policy 
change on domestic economic conditions. 
While in some countries - such as Belgium and the 
Netherlands - the authorities relied primarily 
on changes in interest rates, in others - such as Italy 
and the United 
Kingdom - the scope 
for exchange rate movements within 
the band has been 
used more actively. The 
intensity and frequency of foreign exchange market intervention also 
differed, but 
it is noteworthy that intervention 
was in general accompanied by the use of 
other instruments. 
2.4 Exchange rate policies of 
non-ERM countries 
Portugal and Greece have 
strengthened to different degrees 
the links between 
their currencies and those participating 
in the ERM to assist 
the fight against inflation and 
to prepare the ground 
for eventual 
entry into the mechanism (see 
Chart 9). With effect from 1st October 1990, 
Portugal abandoned its long-standing crawling-peg 
policy and 
allowed the escudo to fluctuate within 
an undisclosed band against a basket of 
ERM currencies. The high interest 
rate differential 
in favour of the 
escudo attracted large capital inflows, 
complicating monetary management and 
contributing to 
an overshooting of 
the monetary 
target. This 
was counteracted by the temporary re-imposition of controls on short-term capital flows. In Greece foreign exchange 
policy is also geared 
towards inflation reduction. Drachma depreciation 
no longer fully offsets 
the inflation and 
labour cost differentials 
vis-8-vis major trading partners, 
thus adding 
to competitive pressures in the economy. 
CHART 9: EXCHANGE RATES 
OF THE 
GREEK DRACHMA 
AND PORTUGUESE ESCUDO *) (AGAINST ERM CURRENCIES) Greek drachma 
Portuguese escudo 
*) Percentage deviation from the level 
of July 1990 (increase = appreciation of GRD or 
PTE) ERM corresponds to a 
weighted average of the ERM currencies 
(using normalised ECU weights). 
2.5 Develo~ments in the Private 
ECU The official ECU, defined as a currency 
basket composed of 
specific amounts of the currencies 
of the EEC Member 
States, came into 
existence in March 1979 at the inception 
of the EMS. It is used 
within the EMS to express the central 
exchange rate 
of participating currencies, to denominate certain claims 
and liabilities, and as a reserve instrument. The 
introduction of the official ECU 
has stimulated the 
evolution of a market 
in private ECUs, created by commercial banks. This market 
is being used 
on a significant 
and growing scale by public authorities and by the private sector. To date, 
the most important usage of 
the private ECU has been 
in financial domain (see Table 8). The ECU still has to make 
a breakthrough 
in the non-financial sphere; its use as 
an invoicing currency 
and as a means 
of settlement of non-financial transactions remains 
very limited. There is a substantial bond market denominated 
in private ECUs, with outstanding bonds amounting 
to ECU 110 billion at the end of September 1991. The share 
of total 
international bond issues denominated in ECU has been rising sharply; it was 12% in the first nine months of 1991 (compared with 34% for the US dollar and 11% for the Japanese 
yen), making it the second 
most commonly-used 
currency for international 
bond issuance in that period. Furthermore, there is a sizable market 
in short-term ECU 
securities, both in the form of Treasury bills 
and commercial 
paper. The ECU banking market has also attained a significant 
scale, with nearly ECU 
180 billion of 
lending outstanding 
at end-September 1991, of which ECU 
46 billion represented loans to non-banks. 
ECU banking is continuing to expand strongly at a time when the overall market, and all 
other major currency sectors, are 
contracting. Furthermore, whereas in the past the growth 
of ECU banking business 
was dominated by a demand for ECU 
credit, since 1989 there has been a tendency for 
ECU deposits to grow faster than ECU 
lending. This tendency was partly related to the 
accumulation of ECU reserves by central banks; as a result, the banking 
system has gradually reduced its net asset position and 
has become a 
net borrower of ECUs 
as from 1991. The strong expansion of ECU markets appears 
to have 
been related to continued market perception 
of the ECU's merits as a vehicle 
to hedge against exchange 
and interest rate 
risks. In addition, the Intergovernmental Conference 
on EMU and the prospective role of 
the ECU in the Third Stage appear 
to have stimulated the 
financial use of 
the private 
TABLE 8: ECU FINANCIAL MARKETS 
a) Source: BIS International Bonds Domestic Bonds 
Treasury Bills Euro-commercial paper 
and notes Bank Assets - interbank - other Bank Liabilities - interbank - other Memorandum Item: Central Banks' holdings of private ECUs a) There is an overlap, in particular between the securities and banking markets, owing to the role of banks as both issuers and holders of ECU securities; thus 
the total size of the market is less than 
the sum 
of the individual markets given 
in this table. ECU billion outstanding 
Sep. 1991 72.3 39.2 7.9 9.7 175.7 (129.8) (45.9) 180.9 (143.1) (37.8) 34.1 Dec. 1989 45.9 24.4 10.3 2.9 128.2 (97.4) (30.8) 116.9 (92.4) (24.5) 17.0 (end of period) Dec. 1990 54.7 35.2 8.4 6.1 148.6 (114.3) (34.3) 149.8 (118.2) (31.6) 27.1 ECU. It should also be recalled that 
the authorities 
of some Community countries and 
supranational institutions continue 
to play an important role in the ECU financial markets. For example, 
around half of the 
outstanding stock of 
international ECU 
bonds have been issued 
by national governments 
and international institutions, 
predominantly in the Community, with the balance of the funds borrowed by the business sector. Some central 
banks also hold the 
private ECU as a reserve asset. 
At the 
end of 
September 1991 
central banks together held ECU 34 billion of such reserves. In many cases these 
assets were acquired from the proceeds 
of government borrowing in ECUs. On a number of occasions central 
banks have undertaken intervention 
in private ECUs 
in the foreign exchange 
market. Derivative financial products in ECUs have been 
launched by the London and Paris 
Futures exchanges, including an ECU long-bond future 
and a 
three-month interest 
rate future. PROSPECTS AND MONETARY POLICY ISSUES 
When conducting the second 
ex ante co-ordination exercise, which 
examined national monetary policy objectives 
for 1992, the Committee 
of Governors reviewed 
forecasts of economic and 
monetary developments 
in the Community. In judging the appropriate 
thrust of monetary 
policy, particular attention was paid to the large 
margin of 
uncertainty surrounding these 
projections and 
the assumptions underpinning 
them. Economic prospects 
Forecasts presently indicate that a 
modest upturn 
in world economic growth is in prospect in 1992, which will 
provide a stimulus 
to activity within the Community. 
In the United 
States, the hesitant recovery is expected to gain momentum 
as the year progresses. Nevertheless, growth 
for the year as a whole is likely 
to be much lower than experienced in the early stages of past upswings. The Japanese economy may 
continue to slow in the early part of 
the year, although recent cuts 
in interest rates 
and budgetary measures are 
expected to limit the cyclical downturn. Activity in the EFTA countries may pick up moderately. However, given 
the close trade integration with the Community, 
the recovery expected 
in EFTA markets 
hinges in turn on a prospective 
upturn in Community markets. World trade prices are likely to remain relatively soft in 1992, leading to only small 
increases in import prices in the Community. 
Against this slowly improving international 
background, and signs 
in many countries 
that domestic conditions 
are gradually beginning to turn 
around, an upturn in economic growth 
in the Community is expected in the course of 1992. Forecasts 
produced in the autumn indicated 
that aggregate economic activity 
in the Community may 
expand by about 2% for the year as a 
whole, a rate 
of growth which would not exert pressures 
on capacity and 
labour utilisation. More 
recent data, however, suggest that 
the outcome could be less favourable. A marked reduction 
in the divergence of annual growth 
rates in the Cornunity is likely in 1992. Growth 
in western Germany will be lower, following several years 
of extraordinary buoyancy, whereas 
in the eastern 
LBnder a sharp 
turnaround is expected. On the other 
hand, most Community countries may have 
passed the 
cyclical trough, although the 
speed and strength of the recovery remain uncertain. Some improvement 
in convergence in budgetary positions 
has been assumed far 1992 on the basis 
of government intentions, although the overall fiscal imbalance 
in the Community is likely to 
remain large. A radical fiscal tightening is planned in Greece and Italy to make 
up the ground lost in 1991 and to move budgetary positions closer to a sustainable medium-term basis. In the other countries 
with either high levels 
of debt or deficits, a relatively firm fiscal stance 
is expected by the national 
authorities, although the prospective reductions 
in budgetary deficits are 
fairly small in most cases. At the Community level, the planned consolidation in the high 
deficit countries 
may be largely offset by an increase in the budget deficits in some countries with both relatively low debt and 
deficits, where 
cyclical conditions 
remain relatively weak. 
As far as labour cost 
pressures are concerned, 
some slowdown in wage growth was expected in the ex ante exercise 
for monetary 
policy co-ordination. This 
was based on the assumption that the resistance 
of firms to meet high wage 
claims would 
stiffen in an 
environment of relatively weak demand and strong competition, as well as that incomes 
policies, where applied, 
would be strengthened. Moreover, should activity 
recover as expected, 
there may also 
be a cyclical improvement 
in productivity, which would contribute to a moderation 
of unit costs. 3.2 Monetary policy prospects In the ex ante co-ordination exercise, 
the Committee of Governors considered that the 
national monetary policy intentions for the current 
year were consistent with the objective 
of reducing inflation in the Community. This assessment, however, 
was contingent upon the assumption that price 
developments would not be threatened by a number of factors outside the control of the monetary authorities. 
In this respect, not 
only may the assumptions 
about the international environment prove 
too optimistic, but there are also 
risks in a number of countries that 
plans for fiscal consolidation 
will not 
be realised, adding 
to the overall fiscal 
pressure in the Community, 
and that 
cost pressures 
will not 
abate as 
expected. If these risks 
materialise, monetary policies 
will have to be reviewed, and, 
if necessary, revised taking due 
account of their primary objective of 
promoting price stability. 
The task of monetary 
policy co-ordination will continue to prove 
difficult, as long as significant divergences persist 
between national 
economic conditions. In the last 
two years, foreign exchange market 
expectations have led to pressures 
for a marked narrowing of interest rate differentials in the Community. 
As a result, the scope 
for setting interest rates with a view to national economic conditions has 
become rather 
restricted. If the benefits 
of exchange rate stability 
are to be preserved, a monetary response 
to shocks originating 
in one country 
- especially if that country plays an important role in shaping economic 
conditions throughout the Community - would be quickly transmitted to 
the other 
Community countries. In this situation, there is a risk that 
a monetary tightening to counteract unfavourable 
price developments in some Member 
States will conflict with the desire for lower 
interest rates 
in countries with a low, or rapidly falling, 
rate of inflation and weak economic activity. However, the resulting policy 
dilemmas between domestic 
objectives and the desire to 
maintain exchange rate 
stability cannot be resolved by monetary policies alone. 
The high degree 
of integration in the Community and the interdependence between the 
national economies imposes 
constraints on all areas 
of national macro-economic management. The 
primary objective of monetary 
policy is to promote price stability 
throughout the Community and it 
is against this objective that the 
success and effectiveness of monetary policy will be judged. As 
long as strong price 
pressures continue 
in a number of countries, there will be severe limits 
to the scope for easing the overall 
monetary conditions 
in the Community. 
The difficulties 
involved in co-ordinating monetary policies in the presence of divergent national conditions, as 
well as the 
costs associated with an unbalanced policy mix, make it of the utmost importance that plans for fiscal consolidation are 
realised and that excessive wage claims are 
contained. Progress in 
these fields is 
essential not only to achieve a marked reduction 
in inflation in 1992 but also to strengthen 
the foundations underpinning 
exchange rate stability 
in the Community and 
to prepare for entry into Stage 
Three of 
EMU. 111. THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES 
OF THE NEW MONETARY INSTITUTIONS IN 
STAGES TWO AND THREE OF ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION 
In December 1991 the Heads of State 
or of Government 
agreed on the text of a Treaty 
on European Union 
which lays the legal and 
institutional foundations for 
an advancement towards a Political Union 
and the establishment 
of Economic and Monetary Union. 
The Treaty 
was signed on 7th February 
1992 and is expected 
to be ratified 
by the Member States in 
the course of 
1992. The realisation 
of EMU in accordance with the new Treaty will 
have a significant impact 
on all aspects of 
economic management 
in the Community. Essential elements of economic union will be economic 
policy co-ordination and rules 
aimed at the avoidance of excessive budget deficits. However, the 
consequences of the realisation of EMU will be most profound in the field of monetary 
policy. Possibly soon after end-1996 
- if the necessary conditions for entering Stage 
Three of 
EMU are found 
to have been met - but at the latest on 1st January 1999, the responsibility for 
monetary policy in the participating 
Member States 
will be transferred 
from the national level to 
the European 
System of Central Banks 
(ESCB). In order to ensure that 
the groundwork 
for the unprecedented move to a single, centrally decided monetary 
policy is laid, 
a European Monetary Institute 
(EMI) will be set up at the start of 
Stage Two 
on 1st January 1994. 
The EMI, which will be liquidated on the establishment 
of the ECB, will not 
only strengthen further 
the co-ordination of national monetary policies 
but will also 
prepare the necessary 
regulatory, organisational 
and logistical framework for the 
ESCB to perform its 
tasks. The Statutes 
of these two institutions 
(which are reproduced 
in Annexes I11 and IV) closely reflect the proposals 
made by the Committee of Governors as its contribution to 
the preparatory work for the Treaty on European Union. 1. THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF CENTRAL BANKS Article 1091(4) of the new Treaty states 
that: "At the starting 
date of the 
third stage, the Council shall, acting 
with the unanimity 
of the Member States without 
a derogation, on a proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting 
the ECB, adopt 
the conversion rates 
at which 
their currencies shall 
be irrevocably fixed and at which 
irrevocably fixed 
rate the ECU shall be substituted for these 
currencies, and the ECU will 
become a currency 
in its own right. This measure shall by itself not modify the external value of the 
ECU. The Council 
shall, acting according to the same procedure, also 
take the other 
measures necessary for the 
rapid introduction of the 
ECU as the single currency 
of those Member 
Statesn. The irrevocable fixing 
of exchange rates rules out 
any possibility of participating 
countries continuing to pursue independent monetary policies. Monetary Union thus implies the loss of monetary policy autonomy at the 
level of the national central 
banks and the adoption of a single monetary 
policy which, in 
accordance with the Treaty, will 
be defined and implemented 
jointly in the framework of the 
ESCB. The ESCB will operate in accordance with the provisions 
of the Treaty 
and of 
its Statute (see Annex 111). 1.1 Objectives of 
the ESCB 
The transfer 
of national decision-making power 
over monetary 
policy underscores the necessity for a clear consensus on the objectives, tasks, and operational features 
of the System. Building 
on the firmly 
shared conviction that 
price stability 
is a precondition 
for sustainable economic growth, the principal task 
of the ESCB is stated unequivocally: 
"the primary objective of the ESCB shall 
be to maintain price stabilityn. This should not be misinterpreted as 
implying that 
monetary policy will be conducted single-mindedly, 
with no regard to the 
other objectives 
of economic policy, as the Statute also requires 
the ESCB 
"to support the general economic policies 
in the Communityn, providing this takes 
place "without prejudice to the objective 
of price stabilityn. 1.2 Organisational features 
of the 
ESCB The organisational 
structure has 
been designed 
to ensure 
an effective achievement 
of the primary objective. The ESCB will consist of a new central institution, the European 
Central Bank (ECB) and the 
national central banks, which will be governed by a common set 
of rules. For the 
System to operate efficiently and coherently, the Member States 
are obliged to ensure 
that national legislation, 
including the statutes 
of each national central 
bank, are 
compatible with the Treaty and the Statute 
of the ECB. The System will be governed 
by the decision-making bodies of the ECB, the Governing Council 
and the Executive Board. The Governing Council 
will be the supreme decision-making 
body on all matters 
relating to the ESCB's tasks and operations. 
It will comprise the President, 
Vice-President, the other 
four members of the Executive Board and the Governors of the national central 
banks. In turn the Executive Board will be entrusted with the day-to-day implementation 
of monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines and decisions laid 
down by the Governing Council. To the extent deemed 
possible and 
appropriate, the ECB shall have 
recourse to the national central 
banks to 
carry out these 
operations. This structure meets 
two essential 
requirements. On the one hand, it allows monetary 
policy decisions 
to be placed firmly in the hands 
of the central decision-making 
body. On the other hand, it 
offers the 
possibility of executing policy decisions through the national central 
banks . 1.3 Independence and 
democratic accountability of the 
System In order for 
the System 
to maintain 
price stability it is 
important that 
the decision-making authorities 
shall not 
be influenced 
by considerations which would 
conflict with this aim. 
In consequence the Statute states 
that the 
ECB, the national central 
banks and any member 
of their decision-making 
bodies shall act 
without receiving instructions from 
political authorities. 
The favourable experience 
with independent monetary authorities in a number of countries 
is particularly relevant for 
a plural 
Community society where 
competing interests 
may tend to give greater 
thought to short-term considerations and thus lead 
to pressures in favour of a monetary policy stance which would not always 
be compatible with price stability in the longer 
run. The Statute contains 
a number 
of provisions to give 
practical effect to the principle of independence. 
Firstly, it ensures that members 
of the decision-making 
bodies can exercise their 
functions under 
assured tenure. Secondly, the functional, operational and 
financial provisions guarantee the economic independence 
of the System. Finally, the 
principle of "one person, one 
vote" in the Governing Council also constitutes 
an element of independence, 
since it reflects the 
consensus that members act 
on behalf of the System 
rather than 
as representatives of the Member 
States. While independence is 
considered to be an essential prerequisite 
for the fulfilment 
of the 
System's tasks, it is also fully recognised 
in the Statute that there must 
be democratic legitimacy 
and accountability. The Statute, 
which as part of 
the Treaty on European Union will 
have to be ratified by the Member States, 
clearly defines the powers entrusted 
to the Governing Council and 
the Executive 
Board, and 
the scope of 
their responsibilities. In addition, the President, Vice-President and 
other members of 
the Executive Board are appointed 
by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the level of the 
Heads of State 
or Government on a recommendation from 
the Council 
(of Ministers of Finance and Economic Affairs 
- the ECOFIN Council) after 
consulting the European 
Parliament and the Governing 
Council. The central 
bank Governors continue to be appointed by the competent 
national authorities, 
but the 
term of office of a 
Governor of a 
national central bank shall 
be no less than five year S. Transparency is 
an important element of democratic 
accountability. In addition to regular 
reports on the operation 
of the System and 
the publication of weekly consolidated financial statements, 
the ECB will present annual reports to the 
European Council, 
the ECOFIN Council, the Commission and the 
European Parliament. Transparency is 
further enhanced by the provision that the President of the ECOFIN Council 
and a member of the 
Commission may participate, without having the 
right to vote, in meetings of the Governing 
Council. 1.4 Operational and 
functional aspects 
To ensure 
the efficient 
operation of monetary policy, 
the Statute 
provides the System 
with the powers to select and 
utilise the necessary instruments and techniques 
of monetary 
control. The relevant 
provisions have been drafted 
with due regard to the evolutionary 
nature of financial markets and 
will allow the System to 
respond flexibly to changing market conditions. To avoid any obligation for 
the System which would render it extremely difficult, 
if not impossible, to attain 
price stability, the Statute denies the ECB 
and the national central 
banks the possibility 
of providing overdrafts or other types of 
credit facilities to 
public entities. In the field of exchange rate policy, the ESCB 
has been 
entrusted with the task of holding 
and managing the official reserves of the Member 
States and of 
conducting foreign 
exchange operations. 
This task must be exercised consistently with the provisions of the 
Treaty. The ECOFIN 
Council may "conclude formal 
agreements on an exchange rate system for 
the ECU vis-a-vis non-Community currencies", 
or, in the absence 
of such a system, may "formulate general 
orientations for exchange rate 
policyn. A number of safeguards 
have been introduced 
to avoid possible conflicts 
between measures taken 
or views 
expressed by 
the ECOFIN Council and the operation of monetary 
policy by the ESCB. In particular, when concluding formal exchange rate "agreements" 
the Council must consult 
the ECB "in an endeavour to reach a consensus consistent 
with the objective of price stability', while "general orientations" for exchange rate 
policy "shall be without prejudice to the 
primary objective 
of the ESCB to maintain 
price stabilityn. The System has also 
been assigned the 
task of 
promoting the 
smooth operation 
of payment 
systems. In relation to the 
wider goal of preserving financial stability in the Community, the ESCB "shall contribute 
as necessary to the smooth conduct 
of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities relating to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the stability 
of the financial systemn. Furthermore, 
the ECB has 
been provided with an advisory role 
on any proposed 
Community or national 
legislation within its 
field of competence. 
1.5 Transitional aspects 
The ESCB 
will be established immediately 
after the date has 
been set for the 
start of 
Stage Three, 
or by mid-1998 at 
the latest. 
In the event that some Member 
States do not 
fulfil the conditions 
for moving 
to the final stage 
they will be granted a 
derogation; protocols relating to 
Denmark and 
the United Kingdom make 
similar provisions 
should a 
decision be taken by either of these countries 
not to enter the final stage 
of EMU. Participation in the ESCB of 
the national central 
banks of 
Member States 
with a derogation is 
governed by special provisions 
in the Statute. These 
provisions recognise 
that monetary policy in these Member States remains 
a national responsibility 
and, furthermore, that these central 
banks should not participate in the formulation and execution of the single monetary policy pursued 
by the ESCB. However, to ensure that co-operation 
with these central banks is maintained, particularly in view of the need to 
prepare for their 
eventual full integration into 
the System, a further decision-making body of the 
ECB will 
be created, the General Council. This Council will be composed of the President and 
Vice-President of the 
ECB, and the Governors 
of the national central banks of all the Member States, 
and will perform consultative 
and advisory functions. 
It will 
cease to exist when all Member 
States of the Community 
have entered the final stage of EMU. 2. THE EUROPEAN MONETARY INSTITUTE 
The EM1 will be instrumental in facilitating and organising the transition to the single 
monetary policy which will 
come into effect in one step at the start 
of Stage Three. 
In preparing the 
transfer of monetary policy competence to the 
future ESCB, two aspects have to 
be taken into consideration. On the one hand, the responsibility for monetary 
policy will remain with the national authorities 
of the 
individual Member 
States, until the start of Stage 
Three, and, 
on the other, at 
the latest at that 
moment the conditions 
and operating procedures required 
for the conduct of the single monetary 
policy will have to be firmly in place. For this reason a 
two-pronged strategy will be followed in the transitional 
phase: national monetary policies will be co-ordinated 
even more 
closely than in the past and, at 
the same time, a wide range of preparatory work will 
be undertaken in order to enable 
the future 
ESCB to perform its tasks. Obviously, the changes in monetary policy operations which will 
become applicable in Stage Three must not infringe on national monetary 
policy autonomy during the transitional phase. However, the need 
to reach a state of readiness on the eve of Stage Three also implies 
that preparations will have 
to be made for the necessary adaptations 
to instruments and procedures currently 
used at national levels 
. 2.1 The tasks 
of the EM1 The importance 
of guiding monetary 
developments towards the introduction of the single monetary 
policy is clearly recognised 
in the three basic 
tasks assigned to 
the EM1 (see Annex 
IV). Firstly, the EM1 is entrusted with strengthening the co-ordination of national monetary policies with a view to ensuring price stability. 
This primary task, together with certain advisory functions, implies 
the assumption of the 
role currently 
performed by the Committee of Governors, which will 
be dissolved on the establishment of the EMI. 
In addition, the EM1 will have to facilitate the use of the private 
ECU and oversee its development, 
including the smooth functioning 
of the ECU clearing system. 
Secondly, the EM1 is called upon to make the preparation required for the conduct 
of a single monetary 
policy in. Stage Three and for 
the establishment of the ESCB 
and the 
creation of a single currency. 
To this end, the EM1 will have to 
specify at the latest by the end of 
1996 the regulatory, organisation and 
logistical framework for the ESCB. This will 
include not only the 
preparation of the 
necessary monetary 
policy instruments and procedures, 
but also cover such areas 
as the harmonisation 
of rules and practices governing the 
collection, compilation 
and distribution of the 
relevant monetary and financial statistics, 
the promotion of 
efficient EC cross-border 
payments and the supervision 
of the 
technical preparation 
of ECU bank notes. Moreover, the 
EM1 may be given additional tasks 
relating to the 
preparation of Stage Three. Thirdly, the EM1 has some operational 
tasks which partly arise from the transfer of 
the functions of the 
present European 
Monetary Co-operation Fund, which will cease to exist at the start 
of Stage Two. Such tasks include 
in particular the 
issuance of official ECUs for the purpose of implementing 
the EMS Agreement. In addition, the EM1 is entitled to hold and manage foreign 
exchange reserves 
as an agent for, and at the request of, Community central 
banks. This latter function, however, is 
subject to rules to 
be adopted by the EM1 which shall ensure that 
the EMI's transactions with these reserves 
do not interfere 
with the monetary and exchange rate 
policies of 
the national authorities and are consistent with 
the objectives of the EM1 and the proper 
functioning of the ERM. 2.2 The structure of the 
EM1 The EM1 will be a Community 
body which will have its 
own legal personality. It will be governed by the Council 
of the 
EM1 which, in addition to the Governors 
of the national central banks, 
will include a President appointed 
by common accord of the Governments of the Member States at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government on a recommendation from the Committee of Governors from 
among persons 
of recognised 
standing and professional 
expertise in monetary or banking matters. 
The President 
will prepare and chair the meetings 
of the Council 
of the EMI, 
present the 
views of the 
EM1 externally and 
be responsible for the day-to-day management. A Vice-President, chosen 
from among the 
central bank governors, will perform these duties in the absence of the President. 
The EM1 will be an independent body. The Council of 
the EM1 may not seek or 
take any 
instructions from 
Community institutions or bodies 
or Governments of Member States. However, since the responsibility 
for monetary policy remains with the national authorities, it is also 
recognised that 
the Governors 
are the representatives 
of their 
institutions. Nevertheless, with 
respect to their 
activities on the Council 
of the EMI, they will act according 
to their 
own responsibilities. During Stage Two, each Member State, 
as appropriate, will have 
to' start the process leading to the 
independence of its central bank, 
completing it at 
the latest by the time of 
the establishment of the 
ESCB. The EM1 will have its own financial 
resources to cover its administrative expenditure. These resources 
will be paid up at the establishment of the 
EM1 in the form of contributions shared 
by the Community central 
banks in accordance with a key reflecting in equal proportions their countries' 
GDP and population. The existence of the EM1 will end with the establishment of the ECB and 
it will go 
into liquidation 
in accordance with the rules 
laid down in the EM1 Statute. 2.3 Preparatory work in the monetary field 
for the move to 
Stages Two and Three 
of EMU The Treaty 
on European Union sets a very 
ambitious agenda for 
the institutional, organisation 
and legal measures 
which at the latest 
will have to 
be specified 
by the end of 
1996, i.e. within less than five 
years. While the preparatory measures for 
the conduct of a single 
monetary policy are explicitly assigned 
to the 
EMI, the complexity of the issues 
involved and the time needed to resolve 
them makes 
it prudent not to await 
the establishment of 
the EM1 on 1st January 1994 but rather to 
commence preparatory work in some of 
the relevant areas as soon as 
possible. For this reason, the Committee 
of Governors 
has not only embarked on the work required for setting 
up the EMI, but has also begun to take the 
first preparatory steps 
for laying the 
foundation for 
the conduct of the single 
monetary policy. PART B THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCm OF THE COMTTEE OF GOVERNORS 
I. THE CREATION 
AND THE EVOLVING ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS The Committee of Governors was created in 1964 by the Council 
Decision (64/300/EEC) of 8th May 1964 
on co-operation between the 
Central Banks of the Member States of the European 
Economic Community. The initial tasks of the Committee 
were: "to hold consultations concerning the general 
principles and the 
broad lines of policy of the Central Banks, in particular as regards credit and money and foreign exchange 
markets, and to 
exchange information 
at regular intervals about the most important measures that fall 
within the competence of the Central Banks, and to examine these While these original 
tasks reflected the modest ambitions 
prevailing at 
that time 
with respect to monetary co-operation within 
the Community, the Committee's role was 
increased at 
the end of 
the 1960s as 
monetary integration 
progressed and plans 
to create an economic and monetary union were first launched. 1 In 1971, the Community Central Banks 
were invited to co-ordinate their policies in monetary and credit matters within the Committee 
of ~overnors.' The Committee also 
became a vehicle for central 
bank co-operation in the balance-of-payments and exchange rate 
fields. In 1970, the Community central 
banks set 
up the system of short-term monetary a multilateral credit 
system giving 
access to short-term funds in case of a temporary balance-of-payments deficit 
due to unforeseen difficulties or 
to conjunctural divergences. Another 
step on the road towards monetary integration 
was made in 1972 with 
the establishment of the 1 See the report to the Council and the Commission 
on the realisation by stages of economic and monetary 
union in the Community (Werner Report), dated 8th October 1970. 
2 See Council Decision 
(71/142/EEC) of 22nd March 1971 
on the strengthening of co-operation between the 
central banks of the Member 
States of the European Economic Community. 
3 See 
the Agreement of 9th February 1970 setting up a system 
of short-term monetary support among 
the central banks of the Member 
States of the European 
Economic Community. 
system for the narrowing of the margins of fluctuation between 
the currencies of the 
Member States 
(the so-called :snaken). 4 At the end of the 1970s the Committee's 
tasks were extended further when the process of economic 
and monetary integration 
was revived. In March 1979, the European Monetary System (EMS) 
was set up to supersede 
the "snaken. The operational procedures were laid down in the central bank Agreement of 13th March 
1979,~ which since then has 
served as the institutional framework for central 
bank co-operation. In 1986, when 
the EC Treaty was revised in the context of the Single European 
Act, advisory status with respect to institutional 
changes in the monetary area 
was conferred upon the Committee 
of Governors (Article 
102 A). Additional advisory tasks 
were assigned to the 
Committee in 1988 with 
reference to 
the abolition of restrictions on capital movements under Article 
67 of the Treaty. Most recently, 
the Committee's responsibilities were increased in the context of Stage One 
of EMU. The mandate of the Committee 
was revised by the Council 
in March 1990 
and is reproduced 
in Annex I. The activities of the Committee under this 
revised mandate were described in Chapter I. 4 Agreement of 10th April 1972 between the central 
banks of the 
Member States of the Community 
on the narrowing of the margins of fluctuation between Community currencies. 5 Agreement of 13th March 
1979 between 
the central banks 
of the Member 
States of the European 
Economic Community laying 
down the operating 
procedures for the European 
Monetary System. The growing role 
of the Committee of 
Governors and 
the assignment of new tasks have 
necessitated changes 
in the Committee's organisational structure from time to 
time. The present structure was set up at the 
start of Stage One of 
EMU in July 1990 (see Chart 10). The Committee 
of Governors is composed of the Governors 
of the 
central banks of 
the Member 
States of the 
Community and the Director 
General of the 
Luxembourg Monetary Institute. A 
member of the 
Commission is regularly invited to the meetings of the Committee. 
In accordance with the mandate, "the members of the Committee, who are the representatives 
of their institutions, 
shall act, with 
respect to their activities on the Committee, according to 
their own responsibilities and having due 
regard to Community objectives". 
The Committee of Governors meets 
at regular intervals, normally 
ten times a year. 
The proceedings of the meetings are confidential; 
however, the Committee may 
authorise its Chairman to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public. In the performance of 
its duties, 
the Committee 
enjoys autonomy. It adopts its own 
rules of procedure 
and, unlike other Committees created under Community 
charter, has its 
own organisational structure. The Chairman is 
elected by the Committee from among its 
members. The present Chairman is 
Dr. E. Hoffmeyer, Governor 
of Danmarks Nationalbank; he succeeded Herr K.O. Pbhl, who relinquished the chairmanship when resigning as President of 
the Deutsche Bundesbank at 
the end of July 1991. The Committee 
of Governors 
is assisted 
by the Committee 
of Alternates, three sub-committees, 
the Secretariat 
and the Economic Unit. 
In addition, for 
specialised tasks, the Committee at times establishes ad hoc working groups. The Chairmen 
of the sub-committees and 
working groups 
are appointed by the Committee of 
Governors, which also appoints its 
Secretary General and the other professional members 
of the Secretariat 
and Economic Unit. The Commission is 
in general represented 
on the various sub-committees and 
ad hoc working groups. The Committee of Alternates 
is composed of senior 
representatives of Community central 
banks who have been 
appointed by the Governors as 
their alternates in the Committee of Governors. The main task of the Committee of Alternates is to 
prepare the 
meetings of 
the Committee of CHART 10: ORGANISATION CHART FOR THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS 
OF THE EEC MEMBER STATES (APRIL 1992) 
COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS Chairman: E. Hoffmeyer (1) SECRETARIAT & ECONOMIC UNIT Secretary General : COMMITTEE OF ALTERNATES l Chairman: FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
POLICY SUB-COMMI TTEE Chainnan: F. Saccmnni (2) MONETARY POLICY SUB-COMMI TTEE Chainnan: A. Borges (3) I Chairman: I I Chairman: I BANKING SUPERVISORY 
SUB-COMMITTEE I I AD HOC WORKING GROUP 
1 ON EC PAYMENT SYSTEMS 
1 Replaced K.O. Pohl with effect from 1st Au st 1991. Replaced H. Dalgaard with effect 
fm 1st %ember 1991. 1:) Replaced R. Raymond with effect fm 1st September 1991. B. @inn T . Padoa-Sch ioppa L --------------- 1 Governors on the basis 
of work carried out 
by the sub-committees, 
the Secretariat and the 
Economic Unit. 
The Committee 
of Alternates normally 
meets on the eve of the Committee 
of Governors' meetings. 
The Commission is, as a general rule, invited to 
send a senior official 
as a representative to the meetings of the Alternates. 
The Foreinn Exchange Policy 
Sub-Committee is 
composed of central bank officials who are involvea in the formulation and implementation 
of national foreign exchange policies. The Sub-Committee 
prepares the 
Governors' discussions on all foreign 
exchange issues. 
This preparatory work includes the monthly 
monitoring of exchange rate and 
monetary developments, the production of regular reports on the functioning of 
the EMS and 
developments in the use 
of the private 
ECU, as well 
as ad hoc studies on special topics. The Sub-Committee 
also arranges for the 
regular exchange of information 
with non-Community central 
banks in the framework 
of the "concertation proceduren. This procedure provides 
for the daily 
exchange of data on exchange market developments, intervention 
and other 
official foreign exchange transactions, 
and for monthly meetings 
of the "Concertation Group", which is composed of the 
members of the Sub-Committee and of the Heads of the Foreign Departments of the central 
banks of the United States, Canada, 
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, 
Austria and Switzerland. The Monetary Policy Sub-Committee is 
composed of central bank officials who are involved in the formulation and implementation 
of monetary policies 
in their national institutions. The duties of 
the Sub-Committee include the 
preparation of the regular examinations 
of monetary policy intentions and their 
implementation as well as the analysis of issues relating 
to the conduct of monetary policies 
in the various stages of EMU. In this context, for instance, 
it holds consultations 
on changes in the definition 
of monetary and credit aggregates 
in the Community and reviews regularly 
developments in the field of monetary policy instruments. 
The Sub-Committee also 
prepares the Governors' annual 
assessments of the Member States' budgetary policies 
and debt 
management. The Bankinn Supervisory Sub-Committee is composed of a senior representative of each Community 
central bank. In the cases where EEC central 
banks do not 
have legal responsibility 
for banking supervision, a senior representative of the respective banking supervisory authority 
- namely, the Belgian 
Banking and Finance Commission, the Danish 
Finanstilsynet and 
the German Bundesaufsichtsamt fur das Kreditwesen 
- also participates in the meetings. The principal task 
of the Sub-Committee 
is to hold 
regular consultations on matters of common interest 
relating to the policies 
and practices of banking 
supervision in the Member States, 
particularly where there is 
a Community-wide dimension. In order to ensure 
effective co-ordination with other supervisory bodies and to avoid unnecessary 
duplication in addressing issues of common interest, the Committee 
liaises with the Basle 
Committee on Banking Supervision, the Banking Advisory 
Committee, and the 
Financial Institutions and Company 
Law Directorate of the Commission of the European 
Communities. For the execution 
of special tasks, the Committee of Governors has, at times, created 
ad hoc working groups. At present, issues of 
direct concern for central 
banks in the field of payment systems 
are being studied 
by such a special working 
group. The Secretariat 
of the Committee of 
Governors provides all secretarial services to the 
Committee itself, the Committee of Alternates and the 
sub-committees, as well 
as to the Board 
of Governors of the European Monetary Co-operation 
Fund (EMCF). In July 1990, an Economic Unit was added to the 
existing Secretariat. The principal task of 
the Economic Unit is to provide 
analytical support 
to the 
work of the Committee 
of Governors. The Secretariat and 
the Economic Unit, which are both headed 
by the Secretary 
General of the Committee, are 
independent in their work from 
any other national 
or international 
institution or government. 
The staff is 
composed of nationals from 
the Member States 
who are in most cases 
seconded from national central 
banks or international institutions. 
The number 
of staff is currently 
nineteen. The Secretariat 
is based within the 
Bank for International 
Settlements, which also provides technical 
and logistical 
support to the Committee of Governors. The expenses incurred 
by the Committee of 
Governors are shared out among 
the central 
banks in proportion to their quotas in the short-term monetary 
support facility. 
CURRENCIES ECU BEF DKK DEM GRD ESP FRF IEP 
ITL NLG PTE GBP USD JPY Belgium Denmark Germany Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom United States of America Japan European Currency Unit 
BelgianlLuxembourg franc Danish krone Deutsche Mark 
Greek drachma 
Spanish peseta French franc Irish pound Italian lira Dutch guilder Portuguese escudo Pound sterling 
US dollar Japanese yen OTHER ABBREVIATIONS BIS Bank for International Settlements 
EEC European Economic Community 
(12 Member States) 
ERM Exchange Rate Mechanism (all EEC Member 
States participate except 
Greece and Portugal) Narrow ERM Narrow band of the ERM (all EEC Member 
States participate except Greece, Spain, 
Portugal and the 
United Kingdom) GDP Gross Domestic 
Product GNP Gross National Product 
OECD Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development 1 Figures for 
the EEC, the ERM, and the ERM narrow band are weighted averages. 2 In accordance with Community practice, countries 
are listed in the Report using 
the alphabetical order of the national languages, as shown above. ANNEXES ANNEX I : Revised mandate of the Committee of Governors ANNEX 11 : Harmonisation of broad monetary aggregates ANNEX 111 : The Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank ANNEX IV : The Statute of the European Monetary Institute Annex I COUNCIL DECISION 
of 12th March 1990 amendin~ Council Decision 
6413001EEC on co-operation between the 
central banks of the Member States 
of the European Economic 
Community THE COUNCIL 
OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing 
the European Economic Community, and in particular to Article 105(1) and to the 
first indent 
of Article 145 thereof, Having regard to the 
recommendation from 
the Commission, Having regard to the 
opinion of the 
European parliamentL, 2Having regard to the 
opinion of the Economic 
and Social Committee , Whereas the European Council, at its meeting 
in Madrid on 26th and 27th June 1989, decided that 
the first stage 
of the 
realisation of economic and monetary union should begin on 1st 
July 1990; Whereas Article 
102a of the Treaty together 
with the realisation of the first stage of the economic and monetary union call for 
an increased degree of convergence in economic performance towards 
non-inflationary growth and of economic and social cohesion 
between the Member States; Whereas greater convergence 
should be promoted with a view to achieving domestic 
price stability, which is at the same time 
a necessary condition for 
stable exchange rates, in accordance with the requirements of the European Monetary System; Whereas the realisation of the first stage of economic and monetary union will 
focus on completing the internal market 
and in particular on removing all 
obstacles to financial integration, on strengthening the process of co-ordination of monetary policies, on 
intensifying co-operation between central banks on other matters 
falling within their competence 
and whereas, in this connection, consideration should be given to extending the 
scope of the central banks' autonomy; Whereas arrangements 
for the formulation of monetary policy within the framework 
of an economic and monetary union 
should provide 
for adequate autonomy 
for the institutions and for commitment to 
price stability, which 
is essential 
to the success of that union; Whereas, in view of the 
objective of the progressive realisation of economic and monetary union, the tasks should 
be extended and the tasks 
1 Official Journal 
of the European Communities 
No. C68, 19.3.1990. 2 Official Journal 
of the European Communities 
No. C56, 7.3.1990, p.47. Annex I and role 
of the Committee 
of Governors 
of the Central Banks of the Member States of the European 
Economic Community should 
be reinforced; 3 Whereas Decision 
6413001EEC should be amended in consequence, HAS DECIDED AS 
FOLLOWS: Sole Article Decision 64/300/EEC is amended as follows: 1. Article 2 is replaced by the following: "Article 2 The Committee 
shall be composed of the 
Governors of the Central Banks of the 
Member States and 
the Director-General of the Luxembourg 
Monetary Institute. If they are unable to attend, 
they may nominate another 
representative of 
their institution. 
The Commission shall, 
as a 
general rule, 
be invited to send one 
of its members 
as a representative 
to the 
meetings of the Committee. 
The Committee may, furthermore, if it considers it necessary, 
invite qualified 
persons to attend and in particular the chairman 
of the monetary committee." 2. The following 
Article is inserted: "Article 2a The chairman 
of the Committee shall be invited to participate in 
the meetings of the 
Council of Ministers 
whenever it deals with-issues involving the tasks of the Committee of Governors." 
3. Article 3 is replaced by the following: 
"Article 3 The tasks 
of the Committee shall 
be: (1) to hold consultations concerning 
the general principles and the broad lines of monetary policy, in particular as regards 
credit, the money and foreign 
exchange markets as 
well as issues falling within the competence of the central banks and affecting 
the stability of financial 
institutions and 
markets; (2) to exchange information 
regularly about the most important measures that fall within 
the competence of 
the central banks, 
and to 
examine those measures. The 
Committee shall normally 
be consulted before the 
national authorities 
take decisions on the course of monetary 
policy, such as the setting 
of annual money supply and credit targets; 
(3) to promote the 
co-ordination of the 
monetary policies 
of the Member States 
with the aim of achieving price stability as a 
necessary condition for 
the proper functioning of 
the European 
Monetary System 
and the realisation 
of its objective 
of monetary stability; 3 Official Journal 
of the 
European Communities No. 77, 21.5.1964, p.1206/64. Annex I (4) to formulate opinions 
on the overall orientation 
of monetary and exchange rate 
policy as well as on the respective measures 
introduced in individual Member States; (5) to express opinions 
to individual governments and 
the Council of Ministers on policies which might affect the internal 
and external monetary 
situation in the Community 
and, in particular, the functioning 
of the 
European Monetary System. In carrying out its tasks, the Committee shall 
keep under review 
the monetary situation 
and pr6qyscts both inside and outside the Community. The Committee shall prepare an annual report on its activities and on the monetary 
and financial conditions 
in the Community, which 
will be transmitted to the 
European Parliament, 
the Council of Ministers, and the European Council. The President of the Committee may 
be invited to appear before the European Parliament on 
this occasion and also before the 
competent committee 
of the European Parliament 
where the circumstances 
so justify. The Committee 
may authorise its chairman 
to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public." 4. The following Article is 
inserted: "Article 3a The members 
of the Committee, who are the representatives of their institutions, shall act, with respect to their 
activities on the Committee, according to their 
own responsibilities and having due 
regard to Community objectives." 5. Article 5 is replaced by the following: "Article 5 The Committee shall 
adopt its own rules of procedure. It may set up sub-committees and provide its 
own secretariat 
and research services." 
Done at Brussels, 12th March 1990. For the Council 
The President 
A. REYNOLDS Annex I1 Over the last eighteen months, 
Community. central banks and the Economic Unit have worked 
together to improve the consistency of 
national definitions of money stocks. The project has initially 
concentrated on 
broad money aggregates, which 
are used as intermediate monetary 
targets or as a key monetary indicator in most Community countries. 
Narrow monetary aggregates may 
be examined more closely at a later 
stage; however, 
a preliminary survey 
has indicated that their definitions 
are already quite 
similar across Community countries. 
The starting point 
for the harmonisation project was to 
select the national measures 
of broad money which seemed to be closest in statistical content. Even though 
their names vary the 
definitions proved to be already reasonably 
similar in most 
cases.' In addition to assets 
included in narrow aggregates (typically those 
used as an immediate means of payment), 
broad aggregates generally incorporate other 
"liquid assets", which are close 
substitutes for a means of payment either because 
they have a short 
maturity or because 
they can be easily transformed 
into a means of payment at little cost 
or risk of loss. Certain discrepancies were identified, however, 
in the asset composition and 
in other aspects, such as 
currency denomination, of the 
national definitions. Nevertheless, 
given the differences in financial structure and behaviour across Community countries, it was 
felt that full 
harmonisation, in the sense of a mechanical 
elimination of all statistical discrepancies, would have 
been inappropriate. 
Rather, the characteristics 
of assets which are, 
or could be, included 
in national definitions 
had to be examined carefully 
on a case-by-case basis in order to assess their 
relevance in practice. Furthermore, due 
regard had 
to be paid to the need 
to preserve the economic 
properties which render monetary 
aggregates useful in the conduct of monetary policy. Among these 
properties, priority was given to the stability of the link between money and 
the final 
goals. The 
importance of controllability 
was less clear, since the process of European financial integration, 
together with the objective of 
exchange rate 
stability, is gradually weakening the scope to control monetary growth at 
the national level. The economic properties 
of the broad 
aggregates chosen as a starting point 
for the harmonisation 
exercise served as benchmarks when assessing alternative 
statistical definitions. Econometric analysis showed that for most 
countries the 
selected definitions have exhibited a fairly 
stable and predictable link 
with nominal income and interest rates over 
the 1980s. Following economic and statistical analysis of 
possible alternatives for national aggregates, 
recommendations for changes 
in definition have been 
put forward. In some cases, they are being embodied 
in official national definitions; 
in others, for 
the time 
being, they will only be implemented for the internal purposes of the 
Committee of Governors, as further analysis 
may be needed. Once 
the proposed changes have been implemented, 
the definitions of 
broad money will 
be sufficiently similar across the Community 
- in terms of asset composition, 
currency denomination and sectoral definition - to facilitate both 
the direct 1 Aggregates selected were M3 in Belgium, Germany, France, 
the Netherlands, Greece and Ireland, 
M2 in Italy, Denmark and Luxembourg, 
M4 in the United Kingdom, ALP 
in Spain, and L- in Portugal. Annex I1 comparison of developments in national money 
stocks and the aggregation of the latter into monetary 
indicators for the area as 
a whole. After harmonisation, 
the aggregates under review 
display the following characteristics: (a) Asset composition 
The aggregates include 
the following monetary 
assets: notes, coins and sight deposits, as well as 
savings deposits, deposits 
at notice and fixed-time deposits, 
except those above certain maturity thresholds in 
a few countries. This latter difference is relatively 
minor in practice since, in the countries where thresholds are not used, assets are 
mostly short-term, and, where 
thresholds are used, 
the excluded 
assets have 
obvious non-monetary features, 
such as a 
very long maturity or 
a high cost of conversion into 
a liquid 
asset. Criteria based on the notions 
of liquidity and 
substitutability with other assets were applied to assess the desirability of including such 
assets as negotiable certificates, 
repurchase agreements 
between banks and 
non-banks (irrespective 
of the asset used as 
collateral), short-term bank bonds, and non-negotiable certificates. (b) Currency 
denomination and cross-border holdings 
To comply with the current practice of 
most Community countries, 
monetary aggregates 
should include 
assets, held by domestic residents, 
independently of whether they 
are denominated in domestic or foreign currency. Data on holdings of those assets are readily available 
when they are the liabilities 
of domestically-located intermediaries. 
However, given 
the increasing importance 
of cross-border 
holdings by non-financial residents, "extended national measures"which include these holdings will 
be used as auxiliary indicators 
according to the availability 
of statistical information. (C) Sectoral definition As long as 
financial structures and behaviour differ, the sectoral definition of money 
"issuers" and "holders" across the Community should take country-specific 
features into account. As a result, no common 
definition of these sectors 
can be put forward. However, as 
a general principle, all monetary liabilities of 
the (domestically-located) financial 
institutions which operate as banks should be included. The resulting aggregate is taken as 
the principal monetary indicator and, 
at present, is 
termed "M3H"for the internal purposes of the 
Committee of Governors. A 
wider concept, called internally 
"M4Hn, is also 
monitored. In addition to the instruments included in M3H, this broader 
concept consists 
of those 
liabilities of 
the non-financial sector which are highly 
substitutable for the components of 
M3H (mainly Government 
short-term paper and corporate 
commercial paper). Annex I11 TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNION AS SIGNED ON 7TH FEBRUARY 
1992 PROTOCOL ON THE 
STATUTE OF 
THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF 
CENTRAL BANKS AND OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL 
BANK THE HIGH CONTRACTING 
PARTIES, DESIRING to lay down the Statute of the European System 
of Central Banks and of the European Central 
Bank provided 
for in Article 4a of the Treaty establishing the European Community, HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, which 
shall be annexed to the Treaty establishing the European Community: 
CHAPTER I - CONSTITUTION OF THE 
ESCB ARTICLE 1 - The European System of Central Banks 
1.1 The European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the European Central Bank (ECB) shall be established in accordance with Article 4a 
of this Treaty; they shall perform 
their tasks and carry on their activities in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty 
and of this Statute. 1.2 In accordance with Article 106(1) of this Treaty, the ESCB shall be composed of the ECB and of the central 
banks of the 
Member States ("national central banks"). The 
Institut monetaire luxembourgeois will 
be the central bank of Luxembourg. CHAPTER I1 - OBJECTIVES AND TASKS OF 
THE ESCB ARTICLE 2 - Objectives In accordance with Article 105(1) of this Treaty, the primary objective of the ESCB shall 
be to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to the objective of price stability, it shall support the general economic policies in the Community with a 
view to contributing to the achievement 
of the objectives of the Community as laid down in Article 2 of this Treaty. 
The ESCB 
shall act 
in accordance with the principle of an open market economy with free competition, favouring 
an efficient allocation of resources, and in compliance with the principles 
set out in Article 3a of this Treaty. 
ARTICLE 3 - Tasks 3.1 In accordance with Article 
105(2) of this Treaty, the basic tasks to be carried out 
through the ESCB shall be: - to define 
and implement the monetary policy 
of the Community; - to conduct foreign 
exchange operations consistent 
with the provisions of Article 109 of this Treaty; - to hold and manage the official foreign reserves 
of the Member States; - to promote the smooth operation 
of payment systems. 
Annex I11 3.2 In accordance with Article 105(3) of this Treaty, the 
third indent of Article 3.1 shall be without prejudice to the holding 
and management by the governments 
of Member States 
of foreign exchange working 
balances. 3.3 In accordance with Article 105(5) of this Treaty, the 
ESCB shall contribute 
to the smooth conduct 
of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities relating to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the 
stability of 
the financial system. ARTICLE 4 - Advisory functions 
In accordance with Article 105(4) of this Treaty: 
a) the ECB shall 
be consulted: - on any proposed Community act in its fields 
of competence; - by national authorities regarding any draft legislative 
provision in its fields 
of competence, but within the limits and under the conditions set 
out by the Council in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42; b) the ECB may submit opinions 
to the appropriate Community institutions or bodies or to national authorities on matters 
in its fields 
of competence. ARTICLE 5 - Collection of statistical information 5.1 In order to 
undertake the tasks of the 
ESCB, the ECB, assisted by the national central banks, 
shall collect the 
necessary statistical 
information either 
from the competent 
national authorities 
or directly from 
economic agents. For these 
purposes it shall co-operate with the Community institutions or bodies and 
with the competent authorities 
of the 
Member States or third 
countries and with international organisations. 
5.2 The national central banks shall 
carry out, to 
the extent possible, the tasks 
described in Article 5.1. 5.3 The ECB 
shall contribute 
to the 
harmonisation, where necessary, of the rules 
and practices governing 
the collection, compilation 
and distribution of statistics 
in the areas within its fields 
of competence. 5.4 The Council, in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
Article 42, shall define 
the natural and legal persons subject to reporting requirements, the confidentiality regime and the 
appropriate provisions for enforcement. ARTICLE 6 - International co-operation 
6.1 In the field 
of international co-operation involving the 
tasks entrusted to the ESCB, the 
ECB shall 
decide how the ESCB shall 
be represented. 6.2 The ECB and, 
subject to its approval, the national central 
banks may participate in international monetary institutions. 
6.3 Articles 6.1 and 6.2 shall be without prejudice 
to Article 109(4) of this Treaty. Annex I11 CHAPTER I11 - ORGANISATION OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 7 - Independence In accordance with Article 107 of this 
Treaty, when exercising the powers 
and carrying out 
the tasks and 
duties conferred 
upon them by this Treaty 
and this Statute, neither the ECB 
nor a national central bank, 
nor any member 
of their decision-making bodies shall seek or take 
instructions from Community institutions or 
bodies, from any government 
of a Member State 
or from any other 
body. The Community institutions and bodies and 
the governments 
of the 
Member States undertake 
to respect this principle and not to 
seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the 
ECB or of 
the national central 
banks in the performance of their tasks. 
ARTICLE 8 - General principle 
The ESCB shall 
be governed by the decision-making bodies of the ECB . ARTICLE 9 - The European Central Bank 
9.1 The ECB which, 
in accordance with Article 106(2) of this 
Treaty, shall have legal 
personality, shall enjoy 
in each of 
the Member States the most 
extensive legal capacity accorded to legal 
persons under 
its law; it may, in 
particular, acquire or 
dispose of movable and immovable 
property and may 
be a party to legal proceedings. 
9.2 The ECB shall ensure 
that the 
tasks conferred upon 
the ESCB 
under Article 
105(2), (3) and (5) of this Treaty 
are implemented either by its own activities 
pursuant to this 
Statute or 
through the national central banks pursuant 
to Articles 12.1 
and 14. 9.3 In accordance with Article 106(3) of this 
Treaty, the decision-making bodies of 
the ECB 
shall be the Governing 
Council and the 
Executive Board. ARTICLE 10 - The Governing Council 
10.1 In accordance with 
Article 109a(l) of this 
Treaty, the Governing Council shall 
comprise the members of 
the Executive Board of the ECB and the Governors of the national central banks. 10.2 Subject to 
Article 10.3, only 
members of the 
Governing Council 
present in person shall have 
the right to 
vote. By way of derogation from 
this rule, the Rules 
of Procedure referred 
to in Article 12.3 
may lay down that members of the Governing 
Council may cast their 
vote by means of teleconferencing. These rules 
shall also provide that a 
member of the Governing Council 
who is prevented from voting for a prolonged 
period may appoint an alternate as a member 
of the Governing Council. Subject to 
Articles 10.3 and 11.3, each member 
of the 
Governing Council shall have one 
vote. Save as otherwise provided 
for in this Statute, the Governing Council 
shall act by a simple majority. 
In the event 
of a 
tie, the President 
shall have the casting vote. In order for 
the Governing Council to vote, there shall 
be a quorum of two-thirds 
of the members. If the quorum is not 
met, the President may convene an extraordinary meeting at which decisions may 
be taken without 
regard to the quorum. 
Annex I11 10.3 For any 
decisions to be taken under Articles 
28, 29, 30, 32, 33 and 51, the votes 
in the Governing Council shall be weighted according to 
the national central 
banks' shares in the subscribed 
capital of the ECB. The weights 
of the votes 
of the members of 
the Executive 
Board shall be zero. A decision requiring a qualified 
majority shall 
be adopted if the votes cast in favour represent at least two-thirds of the subscribed capital of the ECB 
and represent at least half 
of the shareholders. If a Governor is unable to 
be present, he may nominate an alternate to cast his weighted vote. 10.4 The proceedings 
of the meetings 
shall be 
confidential. The Governing Council may decide 
to make the outcome of its deliberations 
public. 10.5 The Governing 
Council shall meet at least ten times a year. 
ARTICLE 11 - The Executive Board 11.1 In accordance with Article 109a(2)(a) of this 
Treaty, the Executive Board shall comprise 
the President, the Vice-President 
and four other members. The members 
shall perform their 
duties on a full-time basis. No 
member shall engage 
in any occupation, whether gainful 
or not, unless exemption is 
exceptionally granted 
by the Governing Council. 11.2 In accordance with Article 109a(2)(b) of this 
Treaty, the President, the Vice-President 
and the 
other Members of the 
Executive Board shall be appointed from 
among persons of recognised standing and 
professional experience in monetary or banking matters by common accord of the governments of the 
Member States at the level of the 
Heads of 
State or of Government, on a recommendation from the Council after 
it has consulted the European Parliament and 
the Governing 
Council. Their term 
of office shall be eight years and shall not 
be renewable. Only nationals of Member States may be members of the Executive 
Board. 11.3 The terms and conditions 
of employment of 
the members 
of the Executive Board, 
in particular their 
salaries, pensions and other social security benefits 
shall be the subject of contracts with the ECB and 
shall be fixed by the Governing Council on a proposal 
from the Committee 
comprising three members appointed 
by the Governing Council 
and three 
members appointed 
by the Council. The members of the 
Executive Board shall not have 
the right to 
vote on matters referred 
to in this paragraph. 11.4 If a member of the Executive Board 
no longer fulfils 
the conditions required for the performance of 
his duties 
or if he has been guilty of serious 
misconduct, the Court of Justice may, on 
application by the Governing Council 
or the Executive 
Board, compulsorily retire 
him. 11.5 Each member 
of the Executive 
Board present in person shall have the right to vote and shall have, for 
that purpose, one vote. 
Save as 
otherwise provided, the 
Executive Board shall act 
by a simple 
majority of the votes cast. In the event of a 
tie, the President shall have 
the casting 
vote. The voting 
arrangements shall 
be specified in the Rules of Procedure 
referred to 
in Article 12.3. 11.6 The Executive 
Board shall be 
responsible for the current 
business of the ECB. Annex I11 11.7 Any vacancy 
on the Executive Board shall be 
filled by the appointment of a 
new member in accordance with Article 11.2. ARTICLE 12 - Responsibilities of the decision-making bodies 12.1 The Governing Council 
shall adopt the 
guidelines and take 
the decisions necessary to 
ensure the performance 
of the tasks entrusted to 
the ESCB under this Treaty 
and this 
Statute. The Governing Council 
shall formulate the monetary 
policy of the Community including, as appropriate, decisions relating to intermediate monetary objectives, 
key interest rates and the supply of reserves 
in the ESCB, and shall establish the 
necessary guidelines for their implementation. The Executive 
Board shall implement 
monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines and decisions laid 
down by the Governing 
Council. In doing so 
the Executive 
Board shall give the necessary 
instructions to national 
central banks. In addition the Executive Board may have certain 
powers delegated 
to it 
where the Governing Council so 
decides. To the 
extent deemed possible 
and appropriate and without prejudice to the provisions of 
this Article, the ECB shall 
have recourse 
to the national central 
banks to carry out operations which form 
part of 
the tasks of the ESCB. 12.2 The Executive 
Board shall have responsibility for 
the preparation of meetings of 
the Governing 
Council. 12.3 The Governing 
Council shall 
adopt Rules 
of Procedure which 
determine the internal organisation 
of the ECB and its decision-making 
bodies. 12.4 The Governing 
Council shall exercise the 
advisory functions referred to in Article 4. 12.5 The Governing Council 
shall take 
the decisions 
referred to in Article 6. ARTICLE 13 - The President 
13.1 The President 
or, in his absence, the Vice-President shall chair the Governing Council and 
the Executive Board of the ECB. 13.2 Without prejudice to Article 39, the President or his nominee 
shall represent 
the ECB externally. 
ARTICLE 14 - National central 
banks 14.1 In accordance with 
Article 108 of this 
Treaty, each Member 
State shall ensure, 
at the latest at the date of the establishment 
of the ESCB, that its national legislation, 
including the statutes of 
its national 
central bank, is compatible with 
this Treaty 
and this Statute. 
14.2 The statutes of the 
national central 
banks shall, in particular, provide that 
the term of office of a 
Governor of a 
national central bank shall 
be no less than 
5 years. A Governor may be relieved from office only if he 
no longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of 
his duties or 
if he has been 
guilty of serious misconduct. 
A decision to 
this effect 
may be referred to the Court 
of Justice by the Governor 
concerned or the Governing 
Council on grounds of infringement of this 
Treaty or of any 
rule of law relating to , its application. Such proceedings shall 
be instituted within two months 
of the Annex I11 publication of the decision 
or of its notification to the plaintiff or, in the absence thereof, 
of the day on which it came to 
the knowledge 
of the latter, as 
the case may be. 14.3 The national central banks are an integral part of the ESCB and 
shall act in accordance with the guidelines 
and instructions of the ECB. The Governing Council 
shall take 
the necessary steps to ensure compliance 
with the guidelines and 
instructions of the ECB, and shall require 
that any necessary information 
be given to it. 14.4 National central 
banks may perform functions other 
than those specified in this Statute unless 
the Governing Council 
finds, by a majority of two' thirds 
of the votes cast, that these interfere 
with the objectives 
and tasks of the 
ESCB. Such functions shall be performed 
on the responsibility and liability of national central 
banks and 
shall not be regarded as being part of the 
functions of the ESCB. ARTICLE 15 - Reporting commitments 
15.1 The ECB shall draw up and publish reports 
on the activities 
of the ESCB at least quarterly. 
15.2 A consolidated financial statement of the ESCB 
shall be published each week. 15.3 In accordance with Article 109b(3) of this Treaty, the ECB shall address 
an annual report 
on the activities 
of the ESCB and on the monetary policy of both 
the previous and 
the current year 
to the European 
Parliament, the 
Council and the 
Commission, and also to 
the European Council. 15.4 The reports 
and statements referred 
to in this Article shall be made available to interested parties 
free of charge. 
ARTICLE 16 - Bank notes In accordance with Article 105a(l) of this 
Treaty, the Governing Council shall 
have the exclusive right to 
authorise the issue of bank notes within the Community. 
The ECB 
and the national 
central banks 
may issue such 
notes. The bank 
notes issued by the ECB and the 
national central 
banks shall be the only 
such notes 
to have the status of legal tender 
within the Community. The ECB shall 
respect as far as possible 
existing practices 
regarding the issue and design of bank 
notes. CHAPTER IV - MONETARY FUNCTIONS AND OPERATIONS OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 17 - Accounts with the ECB and the national central 
banks In order to conduct their 
operations, the ECB and the national 
central banks may open accounts 
for credit institutions, 
public entities 
and other market 
participants and accept assets, including book-entry 
securities, as collateral. ARTICLE 18 - Open market and 
credit operations 
18.1 In order to achieve the objectives 
of the ESCB 
and to carry out 
its tasks, 
the ECB and the 
national central 
banks may: Annex I11 - operate in the financial markets 
by buying and selling outright 
(spot and forward) 
or under repurchase 
agreement and 
by lending or borrowing 
claims and marketable 
.instruments, whether in 
Community or in non-Community currencies, as well as precious metals ; - conduct credit 
operations with credit institutions and other 
market participants, with lending being based 
on adequate collateral. 18.2 The ECB 
shall establish general principles 
for open market and credit operations 
carried out by itself or the national central 
banks, including for the announcement 
of conditions under which they stand 
ready to enter 
into such transactions. ARTICLE 19 
- Minimum reserves 19.1 Subject to Article 
2, the ECB may 
require credit institutions 
established in Member States to hold minimum reserves on accounts with the ECB and 
national central 
banks in pursuance of monetary policy objectives. Regulations concerning the 
calculation and determination of the required 
minimum reserves 
may be established 
by the Governing Council. In cases of non-compliance the ECB shall be entitled to 
levy penalty 
interest and to 
impose other sanctions 
with comparable effect. 19.2 For the application 
of this Article, the Council shall, in 
accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42, define the basis 
for minimum reserves and the maximum 
permissible ratios between 
those reserves 
and their basis, as 
well as the appropriate sanctions 
in cases of non-compliance. ARTICLE 20 - Other instruments of 
monetary control The Governing 
Council may, by a majority of 
two thirds of the votes cast, decide upon 
the use of such 
other operational methods 
of monetary control 
as it sees fit, respecting Article 
2. The Council shall, 
in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 42, define the scope 
of such methods if 
they impose obligations on third parties. ARTICLE 21 - Operations with public entities 
21.1 In accordance with Article 104 of this 
Treaty, overdrafts 
or any other 
type of 
credit facility with the ECB or 
with the national central 
banks in favour of Community institutions or bodies, 
central governments, 
regional, local or other 
public authorities, other bodies governed 
by public law or public undertakings of 
Member States shall be prohibited, as 
shall the purchase directly from 
them by the ECB or national central 
banks of debt instruments. 21.2 The 
ECB and national 
central banks may act as fiscal agents for 
the entities referred to 
in Article 21.1. 21.3 The provisions of this Article shall 
not apply to publicly-owned credit institutions which, in the context of the supply 
of reserves by central banks, 
shall be given the 
same treatment by national central banks and the ECB 
as private credit institutions. 
Annex I11 ARTICLE 22 - Clearing and payment systems The ECB and national 
central banks may provide facilities, 
and the ECB may issue regulations, 
to ensure efficient 
and sound clearing and 
payment systems within 
the Community and 
with other countries. 
ARTICLE 23 - External operations 
The ECB and national 
central banks 
may: - establish relations with central banks 
and financial 
institutions in other countries 
and, where appropriate, with international organisations; 
- acquire and sell spot and forward 
all types 
of foreign exchange assets and precious 
metals; the term "foreign exchange asset" 
shall include 
securities and 
all other assets in the currency of any 
country or units of 
account and 
in whatever form held; 
- hold and 
manage the assets referred 
to in this Article; - conduct all 
types of 
banking transactions in relations with third countries 
and international organisations, including borrowing and lending operations. 
ARTICLE 24 - Other operations 
In addition to operations arising 
from their tasks, the ECB and 
the national central 
banks may enter into operations for 
their administrative purposes or for 
their staff. CHAPTER V - PRUDENTIAL SUPERVISION 
ARTICLE 25 - Prudential supervision 
25.1 The ECB may offer advice to and 
be consulted 
by the Council, 
the Commission and 
the competent authorities of 
the Member States 
on the scope and implementation 
of Community 
legislation relating 
to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions and to 
the stability of the financial system. 25.2 In accordance with any decision 
of the 
Council under 
Article 105(6) of this Treaty, 
the ECB may perform specific tasks 
concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and other financial 
institutions with the exception of insurance undertakings. CWTER V1 - FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 26 - Financial accounts 
26.1 The financial year 
of the ECB and the national central 
banks shall begin on 
the first day of January and end on the last day 
of December. 26.2 The annual accounts 
of the ECB shall be drawn up 
by the Executive Board, 
in accordance with the principles established 
by the Governing Council. The accounts 
shall be approved by the Governing Council and 
shall thereafter 
be published. 26.3 For analytical and 
operational purposes, the Executive 
Board shall draw up a consolidated balance sheet of 
the ESCB, comprising 
those Annex I11 assets and liabilities 
of the 
national central 
banks that fall within 
the ESCB . 26.4 For the application of this 
Article, the Governing Council shall establish the necessary 
rules for standardising 
the accounting and reporting of operations undertaken 
by the national central banks. ARTICLE 27 - Auditing 27.1 The accounts 
of the ECB 
and national central 
banks shall 
be audited by independent external auditors recommended 
by the Governing Council and 
approved by the Council. 
The auditors shall 
have full power to examine 
all books and 
accounts of the 
ECB and 
national central 
banks and obtain full information about their transactions. 
27.2 The provisions 
of Article 188b of this Treaty 
shall only 
apply to an examination of the 
operational efficiency 
of the management 
of the ECB . ARTICLE 28 - Capital of the ECB 28.1 The capital 
of the ECB, which 
shall become operational upon its establishment, shall 
be ECU 5,000 million. The capital 
may be increased by such amounts as may be decided by the Governing Council acting 
by the qualified majority provided 
for in Article 10.3, within the limits and under the conditions set by the Council under the procedure laid 
down in Article 42. 28.2 The national central 
banks shall 
be the sole 
subscribers to and 
holders of the 
capital of the ECB. The subscription 
of capital shall 
be according to 
the key established in accordance with Article 29. 28.3 The Governing 
Council, acting by the qualified majority provided for in Article 10.3, shall determine 
the extent to 
which and the form in which the capital shall 
be paid up. 28.4 Subject to Article 
28.5, the shares of 
the national central banks in the subscribed capital 
of the ECB may 
not be transferred, pledged or attached. 
28.5 If the key 
referred to in Article 29 is adjusted, the 
national central banks shall transfer 
among themselves capital shares to the extent 
necessary to ensure that the distribution of capital shares corresponds to 
the adjusted key. The Governing Council shall determine 
the terms and conditions 
of such transfers. ARTICLE 29 - Key for capital subscription 
29.1 When in accordance with the 
procedure referred to in Article 1091(1) of this Treaty the ESCB and the 
ECB have been 
established, the key for 
subscription of the 
ECB's capital shall 
be established. Each 
national central bank shall be assigned a weighting 
in this key which 
shall be equal to 
the sum of: - 50% of 
the share of its respective Member State 
in the population of the 
Community in the penultimate year 
preceding the establishment 
of the ESCB; - 50% of 
the share 
of its 
respective Member State 
in the gross 
domestic product at market prices of 
the Community as recorded Annex I11 in the last five 
years preceding 
the penultimate 
year before the establishment of 
the ESCB; The percentages shall be rounded 
up to the nearest multiple 
of 0.05% points. 29.2 The statistical 
data to be used for the application of this 
Article shall be 
provided by the Commission 
in accordance with the rules 
adopted by the Council under 
the procedure provided 
for in Article 42. 29.3 The weightings 
assigned to the 
national central 
banks shall 
be adjusted every five years after the 
establishment of the ESCB 
by analogy with the provisions laid down in Article 29.1. The adjusted key shall apply 
with effect from the first day 
of the following year. 
29.4 The Governing Council 
shall take 
all other measures necessary 
for the application 
of this Article. 
ARTICLE 30 - Transfer of foreign reserve assets 
to the ECB 
30.1 Without prejudice to Article 28, the ECB shall 
be provided 
by the national central 
banks with foreign reserve assets, other than Member 
States' currencies, ECUs, IMF reserve positions and SDRs, up to an amount equivalent to ECU 50,000 million. The Governing Council shall decide upon 
the proportion to be called 
up by the ECB following its establishment 
and the amounts called up at later dates. The ECB 
shall have the full right to hold 
and manage the foreign reserves that are 
transferred to it and to use them for 
the purposes set out 
in this Statute. 30.2 The contributions of each national central 
bank shall be fixed in proportion to its 
share in the subscribed capital of the 
ECB. 30.3 Each national central 
bank shall be credited by the ECB with a claim equivalent to 
its contribution. 
The Governing 
Council shall determine 
the denomination 
and remuneration of such claims. 30.4 Further calls 
of foreign reserve assets beyond the 
limit set in Article 30.1 may be effected by the ECB, in accordance with Article 30.2, within the limits and 
under the conditions set 
by the Council in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42. 30.5 The ECB may 
hold and manage IMF reserve positions and SDRs and provide for the pooling 
of such assets. 30.6 The Governing Council shall 
take all other measures necessary 
for the application 
of this Article. 
ARTICLE 31 - Foreign reserve assets held by national central banks 
31.1 The national 
central banks shall be allowed to perform 
transactions in fulfilment of their 
obligations towards international 
organisations in accordance with Article 23. 31.2 All other operations in foreign reserve assets remaining 
with the national central 
banks after the transfers referred 
to in Article 30, and Member 
States' transactions with their foreign exchange working 
balances shall, above 
a certain limit to 
be established 
within the framework of Article 31.3, 
be subject 
to approval by the ECB 
in order to Annex I11 ensure consistency 
with the exchange rate and monetary 
policies of the Community. 31.3 The Governing 
Council shall 
issue gu'idelines with a view to facilitating such 
operations. ARTICLE 32 - Allocation of monetary income of national central banks 
32.1 The income 
accruing to the national central 
banks in the performance of the 
ESCB's monetary policy function (hereinafter referred 
to as "monetary 
income") shall be allocated at the end of 
each financial 
year in accordance with the provisions 
of this 
Article. 32.2 Subject to Article 32.3, 
the amount of 
each national 
central bank's monetary income 
shall be equal 
to its annual income derived from 
its assets held against notes 
in circulation and deposit liabilities to credit institutions. These assets shall 
be earmarked by national central 
banks in accordance with guidelines to 
be established by the Governing Council. 32.3 If, after the start 
of the third stage, the balance sheet 
structures of the national central 
banks do not, in the judgement of the 
Governing Council, 
permit the application of Article 
32.2, the Governing Council, acting 
by a qualified 
majority, may decide that, by way 
of derogation from Article 32.2, monetary income shall be 
measured according to an alternative method for 
a period of not more than five 
years. 32.4 The amount 
of each national central bank's monetary income shall be reduced 
by an amount equivalent to any interest paid by that central bank on its deposit 
liabilities to credit institutions in accordance with Article 19. The Governing Council 
may decide that national central 
banks shall be indemnified against costs 
incurred in connection with the issue of bank notes or 
in exceptional circumstances 
for specific losses arising from 
monetary policy operations undertaken for the ESCB. Indemnification shall be in a form deemed appropriate in the judgement of the Governing Council; 
these amounts may be offset against 
the national central 
banks' monetary income. 32.5 The sum 
of the national central banks' monetary income shall be allocated to the national 
central banks in proportion to their paid-up 
shares in the capital 
of the ECB, 
subject to any decision taken 
by the Governing Council 
pursuant to Article 33.2. 32.6 The clearing 
and settlement of the balances 
arising from the allocation of monetary income 
shall be carried out 
by the ECB in accordance with guidelines established by the Governing 
Council. 32.7 The Governing 
Council shall take 
all other measures necessary 
for the application of this 
Article. ARTICLE 33 - Allocation of net 
profits and losses of the 
ECB 33.1 The net profit of the ECB shall 
be transferred in the following 
order : (a) an amount to 
be determined 
by the Governing Council, which 
may not exceed 20% of the net profit, shall 
be transferred to the general reserve 
fund subject 
to a limit equal to 100% of the capital ; (b) the remaining net 
profit shall be distributed to the shareholders of the ECB in proportion to their paid-up shares. Annex I11 33.2 In the event of a loss incurred 
by the ECB, the shortfall may 
be offset against the general 
reserve fund 
of the ECB and, if necessary, following a decision by the Governing Council, against the monetary 
income of the relevant financial year 
in proportion and up to the amounts 
allocated to the national central 
banks in accordance with Article 32.5. CHAPTER V11 - GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 34 - Legal acts 
34.1 In accordance with Article 108a of this Treaty, the ECB shall: - make regulations 
to the extent necessary to implement the tasks defined in Article 3.1, 
first indent, Articles 19.1, 
22 or 25.2 and in cases which shall be laid down in the acts of the 
Council referred to in Article 42; - take decisions necessary 
for carrying out 
the tasks 
entrusted to the ESCB under this 
Treaty and 
this Statute; - make recommendations and deliver opinions. 
34.2 A regulation shall have general 
application. It shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable 
in all Member 
States. Recommendations and opinions shall 
have no binding force. 
A decision shall 
be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed. Articles 190 to 192 of this Treaty shall apply 
to regulations and decisions adopted by the ECB. The ECB may decide 
to publish 
its decisions, recommendations 
and opinions. 
34.3 Within the limits 
and under the 
conditions adopted by the Council under the 
procedure laid down in Article 42, the ECB shall be entitled to 
impose fines or 
periodic penalty payments 
on undertakings for failure to comply with obligations under its regulations 
and decisions. ARTICLE 35 - Judicial control 
and related matters 35.1 The acts or 
omissions of the ECB shall be open to review or interpretation by the Court of Justice in the cases and under the conditions laid down in this Treaty. The ECB 
may institute proceedings in the cases and 
under the conditions laid 
down in this Treaty. 35.2 Disputes between 
the ECB, on 
the one 
hand, and its creditors, 
debtors or any other 
person, on the other, shall be decided by the competent national 
courts, save where jurisdiction has been 
conferred upon the Court of Justice. 35.3 The ECB shall 
be subject to the liability regime provided for 
in Article 215 of this Treaty. The national central banks shall be liable according 
to their 
respective national 
laws. 35.4 The Court 
of Justice shall have jurisdiction to give judgement pursuant to any 
arbitration clause contained 
in a contract concluded 
by or on behalf of the 
ECB, whether that contract be governed by public or private law. 35.5 A decision of the ECB to bring 
an action before the Court of Justice shall 
be taken by the Governing Council. 
Annex I11 35.6 The Court of Justice shall 
have jurisdiction 
in disputes concerning the fulfilment by a national central 
bank of obligations under this Statute. 
If the ECB considers that a national central 
bank has failed to fulfil an obligation under this Statute, it shall deliver 
a reasoned opinion on the matter after giving the 
national central 
bank concerned 
the opportunity to submit its observations. 
If the national central bank concerned does not comply with the opinion within the period laid 
down by the ECB, the latter may 
bring the matter before the Court of Justice. ARTICLE 36 - Staff 36.1 The 
Governing Council, on a 
proposal from the Executive Board, shall lay 
down the conditions of employment of the 
staff of the 
ECB. 36.2 The 
Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction 
in any dispute 
between the ECB 
and its servants 
within the limits and under the conditions laid down in the conditions of employment. ARTICLE 37 - Seat Before the 
end of 
1992, the decision as to where the seat 
of the ECB will be established shall 
be taken by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the 
level of Heads of State or of Government. ARTICLE 38 - Professional secrecy 38.1 Members of the governing bodies 
and the staff of the ECB and the national central 
banks shall be required, even 
after their duties 
have ceased, not to disclose information 
of the kind covered 
by the obligation of professional secrecy. 38.2 Persons having access 
to data covered by Community legislation 
imposing an obligation of secrecy shall 
be subject to such legislation. 
ARTICLE 39 - Signatories The ECB shall 
be legally committed to third parties 
by the President or by two members 
of the 
Executive Board or by the signatures of two members of the 
staff of the ECB who have been 
duly authorised by the President to sign 
on behalf of the ECB. ARTICLE 40 - Privileges and immunities The ECB 
shall enjoy in the territories of the Member States 
such privileges and immunities as are necessary for 
the performance 
of its tasks, under the 
conditions laid down in the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities annexed to the Treaty 
establishing a Single Council 
and a Single Commission 
of the European Communities. 
CHAPTER V111 - AMENDMENT OF 
THE STATUTE AND COMPLEMENTARY LEGISLATION 
ARTICLE 41 - Simplified amendment 
procedure 41.1 In accordance with Article 106(5) of this Treaty, Articles 5.1, 
5.2, 5.3, 17, 18, 19.1, 22, 23, 
24, 26, 32.2, 32.3, 32.4, 32.6, 
33.l(a) and 36 of this Statute may 
be amended by the Council, acting either 
by a qualified majority 
on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting 
Annex 111 the Commission, or unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the ECB. In either case 
the assent of the European Parliament 
shall be required. 41.2 A recommendation made 
by the ECB under this Article shall require a unanimous decision 
by the Governing Council. ARTICLE 42 - Complementary legislation 
In accordance with Article 106(6) of this Treaty, immediately after the decision on the date for the beginning of the third 
stage, the Council, acting by a qualified majority either on a 
proposal from the Commission and after consulting 
the European Parliament 
and the ECB, or on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting the European Parliament 
and the 
Commission, shall adopt the provisions referred to in Articles 4, 5.4, 19.2, 20, 28.1, 29.2, 30.4 and 
34.3 of this Statute. CHAPTER IX - TRANSITIONAL AND OTHER PROVISIONS FOR 
THE ESCB ARTICLE 43 - General provisions 43.1 A derogation as referred 
to in Article 109k(l) of this Treaty 
shall entail that the following 
Articles of this Statute shall not confer any rights or impose any obligations 
on the Member State concerned: 
3, 6, 9.2, 12.1, 14.3, 
16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 
26.2, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 
50 and 52. 
43.2 The central banks of Member States 
with a derogation as 
specified in Article 109k(l) of this Treaty shall 
retain their powers 
in the field of monetary policy according 
to national law. 43.3 In accordance with Article 109k(4) of this 
Treaty, "Member 
Statesn shall be read as "Member States without a derogation" in the following Articles 
of this Statute: 
3, 11.2, 19, 34.2 and 50. 43.4 "National central banks" 
shall be read as "central 
banks of Member States without 
a derogationn in 
the following Articles 
of this Statute: 9.2, 10.1, 10.3, 12.1, 16, 17, 18, 
22, 23, 27, 30, 31, 
32, 33.2 and 52. 43.5 "Shareholders" shall be read as "central banks of Member States without a derogation" in 
Articles 10.3 and 33.1. 43.6 "Subscribed capital 
of the ECB" shall be read as "capital 
of the ECB 
subscribed by the central banks of Member States without 
a derogationn in Articles 10.3 and 
30.2. ARTICLE 44 - Transitional tasks 
of the 
ECB The ECB shall take over 
those tasks of 
the EM1 which, because of the derogations of one or more Member States, still have to be performed in the third stage. 
The ECB shall give 
advice in the preparations for 
the abrogation of the derogations specified in Article 1091 of this Treaty. 
ARTICLE 45 - The General Council of the ECB 
45.1 Without prejudice to Article 106(3) of this Treaty, the General Council shall be constituted as a third decision-making body of the ECB. Annex I11 45.2 The General Council 
shall comprise the President and Vice-President of the ECB and the 
Governors of 
t.he national central 
banks. The other members 
of the Executive Board may participate, without having the right to vote, 
in meetings of the General Council. 45.3 The responsibilities 
of the General Council are 
listed in full in Article 47 of this Statute. ARTICLE 46 - Rules of procedure of the General Council 46.1 The President 
or, in his absence, the Vice-President of the ECB 
shall chair the 
General Council of the ECB. 46.2 The President 
of the Council and a member 
of the 
Commission may participate, without having the right 
to vote, in 
meetings of the General Council. 46.3 The President 
shall prepare the 
meetings of the 
General Council. 46.4 By 
way of derogation from Article 
12.3, the 
General Council 
shall adopt its Rules 
of Procedure. 
46.5 The Secretariat of the General Council shall 
be provided by the ECB . ARTICLE 47 - Responsibilities of the General Council 
47.1 The General Council 
shall: - perform the tasks referred 
to in Article 44; - contribute to the advisory 
functions referred to in Articles 4 
and 25.1. 47.2 The 
General Council shall contribute to: - the collection 
of statistical information as referred to in 
Article 5; - the reporting activities of the ECB 
as referred to in Article 15; - the establishment 
of the necessary rules for the application of Article 26 as referred to in Article 26.4; - the taking of all other measures 
necessary for the application of Article 29 as referred to in Article 29.4; - the laying down of the conditions of employment of the staff of the ECB as referred to in Article 36. 47.3 The General Council shall contribute to the necessary 
preparations for irrevocably fixing 
the exchange rates 
of the 
currencies of Member States with a derogation against 
the currencies, or the single 
currency, of the Member States without a derogation, 
as referred to in Article 1091(5) of this Treaty. 47.4 The General Council 
shall be informed by the President of the ECB of decisions of the 
Governing Council. ARTICLE 48 - Transitional provisions for the capital 
of the ECB 
In accordance with Article 29.1 each national central 
bank shall be assigned a weighting 
in the key for 
subscription of the ECB's capital. By 
way of derogation from Article 28.3, central banks of 
Member States with a derogation shall not 
pay up their subscribed capital unless 
the General Council, 
acting by a majority representing at least two thirds 
Annex I11 of the subscribed 
capital of the ECB and at least half 
of the shareholders, 
decides that 
a minimal percentage has 
to be paid up as a contribution to the operational costs 
of the 
ECB. ARTICLE 49 - Deferred payment of capital, reserves and provisions 
of the ECB 49.1 The central 
bank of 
a Member State whose derogation has 
been abrogated shall pay up its subscribed share of the 
capital of the ECB 
to the same extent as the 
central banks of other Member States without 
a derogation, and 
shall transfer 
to the ECB 
foreign reserve assets 
in accordance with Article 30.1. The sum 
to be transferred shall be determined by multiplying the ECU value 
at current exchange 
rates of the 
foreign reserve assets 
which have already been transferred 
to the ECB 
in accordance with Article 30.1, 
by the ratio between 
the number 
of shares subscribed 
by the national central 
bank concerned 
and the number of shares 
already paid up by the other national central 
banks. 49.2 In addition to 
the payment 
to be made in accordance with Article 49.1, the central bank concerned 
shall contribute to the 
reserves of the ECB, 
to those provisions equivalent 
to reserves, and to 
the amount still to 
be appropriated to the 
reserves and 
provisions corresponding to the balance 
of the profit and loss account 
as at 31st December of the year 
prior to the abrogation 
of the derogation. The sum to 
be contributed shall 
be determined by multiplying the amount of the reserves, as defined above 
and as stated 
in the approved balance sheet of 
the ECB, 
by the 
ratio between the number 
of shares subscribed 
by the central bank concerned 
and the number 
of shares already 
paid up by the other central banks. ARTICLE 50 - Initial appointment of the members 
of the Executive Board When the Executive 
Board of the ECB is being established, the President, the Vice-President 
and the other members of the 
Executive Board shall be appointed by common accord of the governments of 
the Member States 
at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government, on a recommendation from 
the Council and after consulting 
the European Parliament and 
the Council of the EMI. The President 
of the Executive 
Board shall be 
appointed for 
eight years. By way of derogation from 
Article 11.2, the Vice-President shall 
be appointed for four years 
and the other members of 
the Executive 
Board for 
terms of 
office of between 
five and eight years. 
No term 
of office shall be renewable. The 
number of members 
of the Executive Board may be smaller than 
provided for in Article 11.1, but in no circumstance shall 
it be less than four. ARTICLE 51 - Derogation from 
Article 32 51.1 If, after the start 
of the third stage, the Governing Council 
decides that 
the application of Article 
32 results in significant changes in national central 
banks' relative income positions, the amount 
of income to be allocated pursuant to Article 32 shall be 
reduced by a uniform percentage which shall not exceed 60% in the first financial 
year after the start of the 
third stage and 
which shall decrease by at least 12 percentage points in each subsequent financial year. 51.2 Article 51.1 shall be applicable for 
not more than five 
financial years after 
the start of the third stage. 
Annex I11 ARTICLE 52 - Exchange of bank notes in Conrmunity currencies Following the irrevocable fixing of exchange 
rates, the Governing Council shall take 
the necessary measures 
to ensure that 
bank notes denominated in currencies with irrevocably fixed exchange rates are 
exchanged by the national central 
banks at their respective 
par values. ARTICLE 53 - Applicability of the transitional provisions 
If and as long as there are Member States 
with a derogation Articles 43 to 48 shall be applicable. Annex IV TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNION AS SIGNED ON 7TH FEBRUARY 
1992 PROTOCOL ON THE STATUTE OF THE 
EUROPEAN MONETARY INSTITUTE 
THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES, 
DESIRING to lay down the Statute of the 
European Monetary Institute, 
HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, 
which shall be annexed to the 
Treaty establishing 
the European Community: ARTICLE 1 - Constitution and name 1.1 The European 
Monetary Institute (EMI) 
shall be established 
in accordance with Article 109f of this 
Treaty; it shall perform its functions 
and carry out its activities 
in accordance with the provisions of this 
Treaty and of 
this Statute. 
1.2 The members 
of the 
EM1 shall be the central banks of the 
Member States ("national central banks"). For the 
purposes of 
this Statute, 
the Institut monetaire luxembourgeois shall 
be regarded as the central 
bank of 
Luxembourg. 1.3 Pursuantto Article109f of this 
Treaty, both the Committee 
of Governors and the European 
Monetary Co-operation Fund 
(EMCF) shall be dissolved. All assets 
and liabilities of the 
EMCF shall pass 
automatically to the EMI. ARTICLE 2 - Objectives The EM1 shall contribute 
to the realisation 
of the conditions necessary for the transition 
to the third stage of Economic 
and Monetary Union, in 
particular by: - strengthening the co-ordination 
of monetary policies 
with a view to ensuring price stability; - making the preparations required 
for the establishment 
of the European System 
of Central Banks 
(ESCB), and for 
the conduct of a single monetary 
policy and the creation of 
a single currency in the third 
stage; - overseeing the development of the 
ECU. ARTICLE 3 - General principles 3.1 The EM1 shall carry 
out the 
tasks and 
functions conferred upon it by this Treaty 
and this Statute without 
prejudice to the responsibility 
of the competent authorities for 
the conduct 
of the monetary 
policy within the respective Member 
States. 3.2 The EM1 shall act 
in accordance with the objectives and 
principles stated in Article 2 of the 
Statute of the 
ESCB. ARTICLE 4 - Primary tasks 4.1 In accordance with Article 109f(2) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall : - strengthen co-operation 
between the 
national central banks; 
Annex IV - strengthen the co-ordination 
of the 
monetary policies of 
the Member States 
with the aim of ensuring price 
stability; - monitor the functioning of 
the ~uro~ean Monetary System 
(EMS); - hold consultations concerning 
issues falling 
within the competence of the national central 
banks and 
affecting the stability of 
financial institutions and markets; 
- take over the tasks of 
the EMCF; in particular it shall perform 
the functions 
referred to in Articles 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3; - facilitate the use 
of the ECU and oversee its development, 
including the smooth functioning of the 
ECU clearing system. The EM1 shall also: 
- hold regular 
consultations concerning the 
course of monetary 
policies and the use 
of monetary policy instruments; - normally be consulted 
by the national monetary authorities 
before they take decisions 
on the course of 
monetary policy in the context 
of the common framework for ex ante co-ordination. 
4.2 At the latest 
by 31st December 1996, 
the EM1 shall specify the regulatory, organisational 
and logistical framework necessary for 
the ESCB 
to perform its 
tasks in the third stage, in accordance with the principle 
of an open market economy with free competition. This 
framework shall 
be submitted by the Council 
of the EM1 for decision to 
the ECB at the date 
of its establishment. In accordance with Article 109f(3) of this Treaty, the 
EM1 shall in particular: - prepare the instruments 
and the procedures 
necessary for 
carrying out 
a single 
monetary policy in the third 
stage; - promote the harmonisation, where necessary, 
of the rules 
and practices governing the 
collection, compilation 
and distribution of statistics 
in the areas 
within its field of competence; - prepare the rules for 
operations to be undertaken by the national central 
banks in the framework of the 
ESCB; - promote the efficiency 
of cross-border payments; 
- supervise the technical preparation 
of ECU bank notes. ARTICLE 5 - Advisory functions 
5.1 In accordance with Article 109f(4) of this Treaty, the Council 
of the EM1 may formulate opinions or recommendations 
on the overall 
orientation of monetary 
policy and 
exchange rate policy as well as on 
related measures introduced in each Member 
State. The EM1 may submit opinions or recommendations 
to governments and to 
the Council on policies which might affect 
the internal or external monetary 
situation in the Community and, in particular, the functioning of the EMS. 5.2 The Council 
of the EM1 may also make recommendations to 
the monetary authorities 
of the 
Member States concerning the conduct of their monetary policy. 5.3 In accordance with Article 109f(6) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall be consulted by the Council regarding 
any proposed Community 
act within its field 
of competence. 
Within the limits and 
under the conditions set out by the Council acting 
by a qualified majority on a proposal 
from the Commission 
and after consulting 
the European Parliament 
and the EMI, the 
EM1 shall be consulted by the authorities 
of the Member States on any draft legislative 
Annex IV provision within its field 
of competence, in particular with regard to Article 4.2. 5.4 In accordance with Article 109f(5) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 may publish its opinions 
and its recommendations. ARTICLE 6 - Operational and technical functions 
6.1 The EM1 shall: - provide for the multilateralisation of positions 
resulting from 
interventions by the national central 
banks in Community currencies and the multilateralisation of intra-Community settlements; - administer the very short-term financing mechanism 
provided for 
by the Agreement 
of 13th March 1979 between the central 
banks of the Member 
States of the European Economic Community laying down the operating procedures 
for the European Monetary System 
(hereinafter referred 
to as "EMS Agreementn) and the short-term 
monetary support mechanism provided for in the Agreement 
between the central 
banks of the Member States 
of the European 
Economic Community of 
9th February 1970, as amended; 
- perform the functions referred 
to in Article 11 of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 1969188 of 24th June 
1988 establishing a 
single facility 
providing medium-term financial assistance for 
Member States' balances of 
payments. 6.2 The 
EM1 may receive 
monetary reserves 
from the national 
central banks and issue ECUs against such 
assets for the 
purpose of implementing 
the EMS Agreement. These ECUs may be used 
by the EM1 and the national 
central banks as a 
means of settlement and 
for transactions between them 
and the 
EMI. The EM1 shall take the necessary administrative measures for 
the implementation of this 
paragraph. 6.3 The EM1 may grant to the 
monetary authorities 
of third 
countries and to international 
monetary institutions the 
status of 
"Other Holders" of ECUs 
and fix the terms and conditions under which such ECUs may be acquired, held 
or used by Other Holders. 
6.4 The EM1 shall be entitled to hold and manage foreign 
exchange reserves as 
an agent for 
and at the request 
of national central 
banks. Profits and losses 
regarding these reserves shall 
be for the account 
of the national central 
bank depositing 
the reserves. The EM1 shall perform this 
function on 
the basis of bilateral 
contracts in accordance with rules laid 
down in a decision of the 
EMI. These rules shall ensure that transactions 
with these reserves 
shall not interfere with the monetary policy and 
exchange rate 
policy of 
the competent monetary 
authority of 
any Member State and 
shall be consistent with the objectives 
of the EM1 and the proper 
functioning of the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
of the 
EMS. ARTICLE 7 - Other tasks 
7.1 Once a year the 
EM1 shall address a 
report to the Council 
on the state 
of the 
preparations for the 
third stage. These reports 
shall include an assessment of the progress towards 
convergence in the Community, and cover 
in particular the 
adaptation of monetary policy instruments and 
the preparation 
of the procedures necessary for carrying out 
a single 
monetary policy in the third stage, as well as 
the statutory 
requirements Annex IV to be fulfilled for national 
central banks 
to become an integral part of 
the ESCB. 7.2 In accordance with the Council decisions referred 
to in Article 109f(7) of this 
Treaty, the EM1 may perform other tasks for 
the preparation of the third stage. ARTICLE 8 - Independence The members 
of the Council of 
the EM1 who are the representatives of their institutions 
shall, with respect to 
their activities, act according 
to their 
own responsibilities. In exercising the powers and performing the tasks and duties conferred 
upon them 
by this Treaty and 
this Statute, the Council of the EM1 may not seek or take any 
instructions from Community institutions or 
bodies or governments of Member States. The Community institutions and bodies 
as well 
as the governments of the 
Member States undertake to respect this principle and 
not to seek to influence the 
Council of the EM1 in the performance of its tasks. ARTICLE 9 - Administration 9.1 In accordance with Article 109f(l) of this 
Treaty, the EM1 shall be directed and 
managed by the Council of 
the EMI. 9.2 The Council 
of the EM1 shall consist of a 
President and the Governors of the national 
central banks, one 
of whom shall be Vice-President. If a Governor is 
prevented from attending 
a meeting, he may nominate another 
representative of 
his institution. 9.3 The President shall 
be appointed 
by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the level of Heads of 
State or of 
Government, on a recommendation from, 
as the case 
may be, the Committee of 
Governors or the Council 
of the EMI, and after consulting the 
European Parliament and the 
Council. The President 
shall be selected 
from among persons 
of recognised standing and professional experience 
in monetary or banking matters. Only nationals 
of Member States may be President 
of the EMI. The Council of the 
EM1 shall appoint 
the Vice-President. The President and 
Vice-President shall be appointed for a 
period of three years. 9.4 The President 
shall perform 
his duties on 
a full-time basis. He shall not engage 
in any occupation, 
whether gainful or 
not, unless exemption is 
exceptionally granted 
by the Council of the 
EMI. 9.5 The President 
shall: - prepare and chair 
the meetings of the 
Council of the 
EMI; - without prejudice to Article 22, present the views of 
the EM1 externally; - be responsible for 
the day-to-day management 
of the 
EMI. In the absence 
of the President, his duties shall 
be performed 
by the Vice-President. 
9.6 The terms and conditions of employment of 
the President, 
in particular his salary, pension 
and other social security 
benefits, shall be the subject of a 
contract with the EM1 and shall be fixed by the Council of the EM1 on a proposal from a Committee comprising three 
members appointed by the Committee of Governors 
or the Council of the EMI, as the 
case may Annex IV be, and three members 
appointed by the Council. The President 
shall not have the right to 
vote on 
matters referred to in this paragraph. 
9.7 If the President no 
longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of his duties 
or if he has been 
guilty of serious misconduct, the Court of Justice may, on application by the Council of the 
EMI, compulsorily retire him. 
9.8 The Rules 
of Procedure of the EM1 shall be adopted by the Council of the EMI. 
ARTICLE 10 - Meetings of the Council 
of the EMI and voting procedures 
10.1 The 
Council of the EM1 shall meet at least ten times 
a year. The proceedings of Council meetings 
shall be confidential. The 
Council of the EM1 may, acting unanimously, decide to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public. 10.2 Each member 
of the Council of the EM1 or his nominee shall have 
one vote. 10.3 Save as 
otherwise provided for in this Statute, the Council of the EM1 shall act by a simple majority 
of its members. 10.4 Decisions to be taken in the context of Articles 4.2, 5.4, 6.2 
and 6.3 shall require unanimity of the members of the Council of the EMI. 
The adoption of opinions and recommendations under Articles 
5.1 and 5.2, the adoption of decisions under Articles 
6.4, 16 and 23.6 and the adoption of guidelines under Article 
15.3 shall require a qualified majority of two-thirds of the members of the Council of the EMI. 
ARTICLE 11 - Inter-institutional co-operation and reporting 
requirements 11.1 The 
President of the Council and a member of the Commission may participate, without having the right 
to vote, in meetings of the Council of the EMI. 11.2 The 
President of the EM1 shall be invited to participate 
in Council meetings 
when the Council is discussing 
matters relating 
to the objectives and tasks of the EMI. 
11.3 At 
a date to be established in the Rules of Procedure, the EM1 shall prepare 
an annual report 
on its activities and on monetary and financial conditions 
in the Community. The annual report, together with 
the annual accounts 
of the EMI, shall be addressed to the 
European Parliament, the Council and the 
Commission and also to the European Council. 
The President of the EM1 may, at the request of the European Parliament or on his own initiative, 
be heard by the competent Committees 
of the European Parliament. 11.4 Reports published by the EM1 shall be made available 
to interested parties free of charge. ARTICLE 12 - Currency denomination The operations of the 
EM1 shall be expressed in ECU. ARTICLE 13 - Seat Before the end of 1992, the decision as to where the seat of the EM1 will be established shall 
be taken by common accord of the Annex IV governments of the Member States 
at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government. ARTICLE 14 - Legal capacity The EMI, which 
in accordance with Article 109f(l) of this 
Treaty shall 
have legal personality, 
shall enjoy 
in each of the Member 
States the 
most extensive legal 
capacity accorded 
to legal 
persons under their law; it may, in 
particular, acquire 
or dispose of movable or immovable property 
and may be a party to legal 
proceedings. ARTICLE 15 - Legal acts 
15.1 In the performance of 
its tasks, and under 
the conditions laid down in this Statute, the EM1 shall: - deliver opinions; 
- make recommendations; 
- adopt guidelines, 
and take 
decisions, which 
shall be addressed to the national central 
banks. 15.2 Opinions and recommendations of the 
EM1 shall have no binding force . 15.3 The Council of the 
EM1 may adopt guidelines laying 
down the methods for the implementation 
of the conditions necessary for 
the ESCB 
to perform its functions in the third stage. 
EM1 guidelines shall have 
no binding force; they shall 
be submitted for decision to 
the ECB. 
15.4 Without prejudice to Article 3.1, a decision of the EM1 shall be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed. Articles 
190 and 191 of this Treaty shall 
apply to these decisions. 
ARTICLE 16 - Financial resources 16.1 The EM1 shall be endowed with its own resources. The size 
of the resources 
of the EM1 shall be determined by the Council of the 
EM1 with a view to ensuring 
the income deemed necessary to cover 
the administrative expenditure incurred 
in the performance of the 
tasks and functions 
of the 
EM1 . 16.2 The resources 
of the EM1 determined in accordance with Article 16.1 shall be provided out 
of contributions by the national central 
banks in accordance with the key referred to in Article 29.1 of the 
Statute of the ESCB 
and be paid up at the establishment of 
the EMI. For this purpose, the statistical 
data to be used for the determination 
of the key shall be provided by the Commission, 
in accordance with the rules adopted 
by the Council, acting by a qualified majority on a proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting 
the European Parliament, the Committee of Governors and the Committee referred to in Article 109c of this Treaty. 
16.3 The Council of the 
EM1 shall determine 
the form in which contributions shall 
be paid up. 
ARTICLE 17 - Annual accounts and auditing 17.1 The financial year 
of the EM1 shall begin 
on the first day 
of January and 
end on the last day of 
December. 17.2 The Council 
of the 
EM1 shall adopt an annual budget before the beginning of each financial year. Annex IV 
17.3 The annual accounts shall 
be drawn up in accordance with the principles established 
by the Council of the EMI. 
The annual accounts shall be approved by the Council of the EM1 and shall thereafter 
be published. 17.4 The annual accounts shall 
be audited by independent external auditors approved 
by the Council 
of the EMI. The auditors shall 
have full power to examine all 
books and accounts of the 
EM1 and to 
obtain full information about its 
transactions. The provisions of 
Article 188b of this Treaty shall 
only apply 
to an examination of the operational efficiency of 
the management 
of the EM1 . 17.5 Any surplus of the 
EM1 shall be transferred in the following 
order: (a) an amount to 
be determined 
by the Council of the 
EM1 shall be transferred to 
the general reserve fund 
of the 
EMI; (b) any remaining surplus shall 
be distributed to the 
national central banks in accordance with the key referred to 
in Article 16.2. 17.6 In the event of 
a loss incurred 
by the EMI, the shortfall shall 
be offset against the general reserve 
fund of the EMI. Any remaining shortfall shall 
be made good by contributions from the national central banks, in accordance with the key as 
referred to 
in Article 16.2. ARTICLE 18 - Staff 18.1 The Council 
of the EM1 shall lay 
down the conditions of employment of the staff of the 
EMI. 18.2 The Court 
of Justice shall 
have jurisdiction in any dispute 
between the EM1 and its servants 
within the limits and 
under the conditions laid down in the conditions of employment. ARTICLE 19 - Judicial control 
and related 
matters 19.1 The acts or 
omissions of the EM1 shall be open to review 
or interpretation by the Court of Justice in the cases and under the conditions laid down in this Treaty. The 
EM1 may institute proceedings 
in the cases and under the conditions laid 
down in this Treaty. 19.2 Disputes between the EMI, on the one 
hand, and its creditors, 
debtors or any 
other person, 
on the other, shall fall within 
the jurisdiction of the competent national 
courts, save where jurisdiction has been conferred 
upon the Court of Justice. 
19.3 The EM1 shall be subject to the liability regime 
provided for in Article 215 of this Treaty. 19.4 The Court 
of Justice shall have jurisdiction to give 
judgement pursuant to any arbitration clause 
contained in a contract concluded 
by or on behalf of 
the EMI, whether that contract be governed by public or 
private law. 
19.5 A decision of the EM1 to bring an action before the Court 
of Justice shall be taken by the Council of the 
EMI. Annex IV ARTICLE 20 - Professional secrecy 20.1 Members of 
the Council 
of the EM1 and the staff of the 
EM1 shall be required, even after 
their duties have ceased, not to disclose 
information of the kind 
covered by the obligation of professional secrecy. 
20.2 Persons having access 
to data covered by Community legislation 
imposing an obligation of secrecy shall 
be subject to such legislation. 
ARTICLE 21 - Privileges and 
inununities The EM1 shall enjoy in the territories of the 
Member States such privileges 
and immunities as are necessary for the 
performance of its tasks, under 
the conditions laid down in the Protocol on the Privileges and 
Immunities of the 
European Communities annexed 
to the 
Treaty establishing a 
Single Council and 
a Single Commission of the European Communities. 
ARTICLE 22 - Signatories The EM1 shall be legally committed 
to third parties 
by the President or the Vice-President 
or by the signatures of 
two members 
of the staff of 
the EM1 who have been duly authorised 
by the President to sign on 
behalf of 
the EMI. ARTICLE 23 - Liquidation of the EMI 23.1 In accordance with 
Article 1091 of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall go into liquidation 
on the establishment of the 
ECB. All assets 
and liabilities of 
the EM1 shall then pass automatically to the ECB. The latter shall liquidate 
the EM1 according to the 
provisions of this Article. The liquidation 
shall be completed by the beginning of the third stage. 
23.2 The mechanism for 
the creation of ECUs against gold and US dollars as provided for by Article 17 of the EMS Agreement shall be unwound by the first day 
of the third 
stage in accordance with Article 20 of the said Agreement. 
23.3 All claims and liabilities 
arising from 
the very short-term financing mechanism 
and the short-term monetary 
support mechanism, under the Agreements referred to in Article 6.1, shall be settled 
by the first 
day of the third stage. 23.4 All remaining assets of the 
EM1 shall be disposed of and 
all remaining liabilities 
of the 
EM1 shall be settled. 
23.5 The proceeds of 
the liquidation described in Article 23.4 shall be distributed to the national central 
banks in accordance with the key referred to 
in Article 16.2. 23.6 The Council 
of the 
EM1 may take 
the measures necessary for 
the application of Articles 23.4 and 23.5. 23.7 Upon the establishment 
of the ECB, the President of the EM1 shall relinquish his 
office. COMMITTEE OF 
GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE 
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY 
ANNUAL REPORT (July 1990 - December 1991) ISBN 92-9166-201-1 (PRINT), 92-9166-202-X (ONLINE)MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
A. Verplaetse APRIL 1992 Nationale Bank 
van BelgiGlBanque Nationale de Belgique 
E. Hoffmeyer Danmarks Nationalbank H. Schlesinger* Deutsche Bundesbank 
E. Christodoulou** Bank of Greece M. Rubio Banco de 
Espafia J. de Larosi5re Banque de France 
M. Doyle C. Ciampi Central Bank of Ireland Banca d'Italia P. Jaans Institut Monetaire Luxembourgeois W. Duisenberg Nederlandsche Bank J. Tavares Moreira 
R. Leigh-Pemberton Banco de Portugal 
Bank of England A member of the Commission of the 
European Communities 
is invited, as a representative, to the 
meetings of the Committee of Governors. * Replaced K.O. Pbhl with effect from 1st August 1991. 
** Replaced D. Chalikias with effect from 18th February 
1992. TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Pane INTRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT ..................... 1 PART A 
MONETARY ISSVES AhlD THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
. I . ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE OF 
GOVERNORS .......... 1 . Co-ordination of monetary policies 
........... 2 . Monitoring EMS developments .............. 3 . Work related to the move to the final stage of EMU ... 4 . Issues in the 
field of Banking Supervision and payment systems ........................ 5 . Relationships with central banks outside the Community . 6 . Co-operation with 
other Community bodies ........ I1 . ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
AND MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION . . 1 . The economic background to monetary policy 
....... 2 . Monetary and exchange rate developments ........ 3 . Prospects and monetary policy issues .......... I11 . THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES 
OF THE NEW MONETARY INSTITUTIONS 
IN STAGES TWO AND THREE OF ECONOMIC 
AND MONETARY UNION 
.... 1 . The European System 
of Central Banks .......... 2 . The European Monetary Institute 
............ PART B THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS . I . THE CREATION AND THE EVOLVING ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF ......................... GOVERNORS I1 . THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF 
THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS . I . Revised mandate 
of the Committee of Governors ........ I1 . Harmonisation of broad monetary aggregates ......... I11 . The Statute of the European System 
of Central Banks 
and of the European Central 
Bank .................... IV . The Statute of the European Monetary Institute 
....... SUMMARY TABLE : CHART 1 TABLE 1 TABLE 2 TABLE 3 TABLE 4 CHART 2 TABLE 5 TABLE 6 TABLE 7 CHART 3 CHART 4 CHART 5 CHART 6 CHART 7 CHART 8 CHART 9 TABLE 8 CHART 10 Abbreviations and symbols used 
in the Tables and Charts are listed on Pane 
65 Page ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
IN THE COMMUNITY . . . 
. . . . 
. . 
. . . 
. . . . . 
. . . 4 REAL GROWTH AND INFLATION IN THE 
COMMUNITY . . . 
6 DEVELOPMENTS IN REAL GDP 
. . . . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. 18 DEVELOPMENTS IN CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION . . . . 
19 WAGE DEVELOPMENTS (Compensation 
per employee) . . 
22 GENERAL GOVERNMENT BORROWING 
REQUIREMENTS . . . 2 3 
BUDGETARY POSITIONS 
IN THE COMMUNITY . . . 
. . 
. 25 CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCES 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . 
. 26 DEVELOPMENTS IN BROAD MONETARY AGGREGATES 
. . . 
2 8 
MONETARY TARGETS AND 
OUTTURNS . . . . . . . . 
. 29 SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES IN ERM COUNTRIES 
. 31 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
IN INTEREST RATES 
. . . . 
. 3 2 LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES 
IN ERM COUNTRIES 
. . . 
35 EXCHANGE RATES OF THE ECU AGAINST 
THE US 
DOLLAR ANDJAPANESEYEN . . . . 
. . . 
. . . . . . 
. . 
. 3 6 
POSITIONS OF ERM CURRENCIES . . . 
. . . . . . . 38 FORWARD EXCHANGE RATES IN THE 
ERM . . . . . . . 
. 4 0 EXCHANGE RATES 
OF THE GREEK 
DRACHMA AND THE PORTUGUESE ESCUDO . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . 
4 2 ECU FINANCIAL MARKETS 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . 
44 ORGANISATION CHART FOR THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 62 1 Whenever tables and charts provide 
aggregate measures for 
the Community, the ERM and narrow band members, the measures 
are based on countries' participation in 1991. The aggregate measures 
are weighted averages. INTRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT This is the first 
Annual Report of the Committee of Governors on 
its activities and 
on the monetary and financial conditions 
in the Community. The Report 
has been 
prepared in accordance with the Committee's mandate as laid down in the amended Council 
Decision of 
12th March 1990. It covers developments 
during the first one and a 
half years of Stage 
One of Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU), which started on 1st July 1990. Monetary policy co-ordination - the principal 
task of the Committee of Governors The Committee 
of Governors was 
established in 1964 and has 
since then been 
the principal 
forum for co-operation between 
the central banks of 
the EEC Member States. On the entry 
into Stage One of 
EMU the role 
of the 
Committee was considerably strengthened and 
its tasks 
were extended. In particular, additional 
emphasis was placed on the promotion 
of the co-ordination of monetary policies 
with the aim of achieving price stability as 
a necessary condition for 
the proper 
functioning of the European Monetary System (EMS). Although during Stages One and 
Two responsibility for monetary policy remains with 
the national authorities, 
the emphasis on co-ordination in the Committee's mandate reflects the recognition that both 
changes in the economic environment of the Community 
and the objective of creating 
EMU have greatly 
increased the need for compatible monetary 
policies. The gradual realisation 
of a single 
market, in particular the liberalisation 
of capital movements and 
the rapid 
integration of financial markets, 
and the 
enhanced stability of exchange 
rates within the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
(ERM) of the EMS have 
strengthened the interdependence between national 
monetary policies. As a result, the effectiveness of 
monetary policy in Member States is 
becoming increasingly 
dependent upon central bank co-operation. Moreover, the 
agreement to complete EMU within a limited 
number of years has made the 
achievement of a 
high degree of economic 
and financial convergence even more 
urgent. Gearing monetary policies to 
the attainment of 
a stable 
level of prices throughout the Community 
constitutes a crucial element 
in paving the way for 
a successful 
EMU. The co-ordination 
framework Since the start of Stage One further progress 
has been made in co-ordinating monetary policies, 
reflecting the growing consensus on 
the role of monetary 
policy and improvements in the technical aspects 
of the 
co-ordination process. There is a firmly shared conviction in the Community 
that the primary objective of monetary 
policy is to attain 
price stability, as 
a precondition for 
sustainable economic 
growth and social equity. The 
attainment of 
price stability serves as the 
guiding principle for 
the orientation of monetary 
policy in all Community countries 
and the maintenance of price stability 
will be the primary 
objective of monetary policy in full EMU. In order to 
promote this 
common aim, the Committee of Governors has reinforced its efforts 
to improve the co-ordination 
of monetary policies. In particular, as 
a complement 
to the monthly monitoring 
of current conditions 
in financial and foreign exchange markets, 
the Committee 
has introduced 
an annual forward-looking assessment of Member States' monetary policy 
intentions. This 
ex ante assessment has 
the purpose 
of evaluating their mutual 
compatibility before 
final decisions 
on the course 
of monetary policy for the following year 
are taken 
by the national authorities. This exercise is 
followed by regular reviews of the 
outturn in comparison with policy targets to assess the continued appropriateness of 
the stance of national policies in the light of evolving 
developments. In order to base these examinations 
on firmer 
technical grounds, the Committee has begun 
building a 
common analytical framework which uses a system of indicators and common 
assumptions on prospective economic 
developments, and 
which also involves 
the first steps towards improving the 
consistency, to the extent necessary, 
of the 
national definitions of 
broad monetary aggregates. Although still 
in the early stages of 
development, this technical framework has already 
proved valuable. The need 
to strengthen the co-ordination process was heightened by the fact that monetary policies 
have operated in an environment where the authorities' 
commitment to maintain current 
ERM parities has become 
increasingly credible 
to financial market 
participants. This was 
a significant development, given 
events in this period 
which might have 
led to acute 
tensions: the volatility of 
the dollar, the Gulf 
War, developments in Eastern Europe 
and the divergence of 
cyclical positions within 
the Community. Several factors may have 
contributed to the stabilisation 
of exchange rate 
expectations: the political momentum towards 
EMU; the trend towards more convergent inflation rates; 
the narrowing of current-account 
imbalances; and 
a long 
period without a general realignment, reflecting 
the pursuit of 
a "hard currency option" as a means of implementing 
anti-inflationary monetary 
policies. As exchange rate expectations 
became more stable, 
there was a narrowing of 
interest rate differentials 
between Community currencies. As a result, the financial linkages 
within the Community were reinforced and 
the room for independent national 
monetary policies was further restricted. The co-ordinated setting of monetary policies 
for 1991 In the first 
ex ante assessment of the 
orientation of national monetary policies for 1991, 
the Committee of 
Governors agreed 
that the stance of national 
policies should remain geared towards a further 
reduction of inflationary pressures. 
This assessment took into account 
the less favourable growth 
prospects in many Community 
countries, the 
potential repercussions of German unification, and 
the uncertainties in the international environment 
associated with the conflict 
in the Gulf. The execution of monetary policy was broadly in line with the intentions. Most Member States 
registered a 
slowdown in monetary growth, generally meeting 
the quantified targets where 
these were set. At the same time, interest 
rate differentials narrowed markedly, 
with rates converging towards 
the German level, 
which even though increasing 
during the year, remained the lowest in the Community. While monetary policies 
were in line with the course endorsed by the Committee of Governors, results in 1991 were 
mixed (see 
Summary Table). Although for the Community as a whole the rate of inflation - measured in terms of the weighted 
consumer price 
index - declined from 5.7% in 1990 to 5.1% in 1991, with some narrowing 
in inflation differentials, 
this outcome 
is still far 
from the final goal of price stability. 
Moreover, not 
only was inflation in 1991 appreciably higher than 
the average rate 
achieved over 
the 1986 to 1988 
period, but the result 
was also disappointing 
in the light 
of less inflationary external conditions and 
weaker economic activity 
within the Community than had 
been anticipated 
at the time when monetary jUMMARY TABLE: ECONOMIC AND 
FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS IN THE COMMUNITY a) Source: BIS and 
National Data REAL GDP CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION COMPENSATION PER EMPLOYEE CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE 
C) GENERAL GOVERNMENT 
BORROWING REQUIREMENT SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE 
d) LONG-TERM INTEREST RATE 
e) a) All figures are EEC weighted averages. 
b) Estimates c) A negative 
number indicates a deficit. d) 3-month domestic money 
market rate. e) Long-term government 
or public sector bond rate. 1986-88 average 1989 percentage change 
over the previous year 1990 3.2 3.6 6.1 1991 b) 3.6 5.3 6.2 per cent of nominal GDP/GNP 2.8 5.7 7.5 0.8 4.0 1.1 5.1 7.1 0.0 2.9 per cent -0.2 4.5 8.7 9.2 -0.9 4.3 10.9 9.9 11.6 
11.2 10.9 10.3 policy intentions were formulated (see Chart 
1). In addition, the decline 
in the average rate 
of price increase for 
the Community as a whole was largely a reflection of a substantial 
fall in inflation in the United Kingdom, while 
other countries 
with high inflation 
in 1990 made only limited progress. 
Furthermore, inflation rose 
in Germany and the Netherlands, the two Member 
States with traditionally the lowest rates. 
However, some 
countries succeeded 
in maintaining relatively low rates of inflation. The growing 
confidence in the prevailing exchange rate 
parities was beneficial for business decisions and contributed 
to stable conditions 
in financial 
markets. It also allowed countries 
with sluggish economic activity and 
low or rapidly 
falling rates 
of inflation to reduce interest 
rates in the first 
half of 1991 towards German levels. However, there were 
limits on the extent 
to which interest rates 
could be 
lowered without 
creating exchange rate 
tensions. This became evident 
in the second half 
of 1991, after interest 
rate differentials 
within the Community 
had narrowed to historically 
low levels. At the 
end of 
1991, interest rates 
had to be raised in a number of countries to signal the commitment to 
maintaining exchange rate 
stability. Constraints 
on the scope 
for independent interest 
rate changes have also 
been faced 
by countries experiencing strong inflationary pressures, 
making it difficult to keep interest rates 
at levels considered 
high enough to fight inflation. The importance of appropriate fiscal 
policies and waae developments Both the 
resilience of inflation and the conflict 
sometimes experienced between 
the objective 
of exchange rate stability 
and domestic 
considerations highlight 
the importance 
of other factors which affect price performance, notably fiscal 
policies and wage developments. Budget deficits remained excessively high in a number of 
Member States 
in 1991. Indeed, the weighted average 
of general government borrowing 
requirements in the Community rose 
sharply in 1990, despite the fact that 
low deficits were 
maintained in several countries. 
Plans for 
budgetary consolidation in 1991 were seldom fully met, 
and as a result the 
average deficit 
remained well above 4% of GDP. 
As recent experience has 
shown, fiscal imbalances 
are not just a matter of national concern. Changes in demand and 
interest rates 
generated by excessively expansionary 
national fiscal policies 
may affect economic and financial conditions throughout 
the Community 
and complicate the task of monetary policy in pursuing price stability. 
Large budget deficits within the Community have contributed to 
high real interest 
rates, which have 
dampened private investment and have reduced long-run growth potential. Concerns also apply to labour market developments. Nominal 
wages have continued 
to grow rapidly in the Community 
in 1991, 
increasing on 
average by more than 
7%, in spite of generally weaker demand conditions 
and rising unemployment. In this situation the co-ordination of monetary policies is not sufficient on its own to bring about price 
stability. If more significant progress is to be achieved in fighting inflation 
and creating a 
greater degree of economic and financial 
convergence, the national authorities 
will not only have to rein back fiscal deficits where 
they are excessive, but strong efforts should 
also be made to 
contain wage 
pressures. While these considerations apply to 
all Member 
States, they are particularly important in those which play a pivotal role in shaping the economic and financial conditions 
in the Community. Lessons for 
1992 The experience 
of the first eighteen months 
of Stage One 
was a valuable element in the assessment of the appropriate course 
of monetary policy in 1992. When reviewing national policy intentions and targets for 
the current year, the Committee of Governors was in 
full agreement 
that the thrust of the overall stance 
should be 
to promote 
a further decline in 
inflation in the Community. The monetary policies envisaged 
by the national authorities were 
considered to 
be consistent with this aim and should provide a significant anti-inflationary impetus. However, this appraisal 
was contingent upon the assumption that 
the fiscal consolidation 
and the 
moderation in labour cost pressures expected 
in 1992 would indeed be realised. The fulfilment 
of these expectations is crucial since the 
effectiveness of monetary policies in delivering a stable 
price level in the Community is heavily dependent 
upon adequate support 
from fiscal and other policies 
- especially given 
the desire to safeguard exchange rate stability within the Community 
and the more limited 
room for countries 
to set interest rates 
with a view to domestic economic conditions. 
Indeed, there is an urgent need in many Community 
countries to contain 
cost pressures arising from 
excessive wage 
claims, to adjust 
the policy 
mix by reducing fiscal 
deficits and to 
implement supply-side measures in 
order to render market forces more 
effective. Determined efforts in these fields 
are not only crucial 
if further 
progress towards price stability and a 
resumption of sustainable 
economic growth 
are to 
be achieved in 1992, but also to promote the degree 
of economic convergence which is necessary to 
underpin the 
existing ERM central parities 
in the longer run and to demonstrate the resolve to meet 
the conditions 
for entry into Stage Three 
of EMU. The first part of the Report focuses on the work of the Committee of Governors. In the first Chapter 
the activities of 
the Committee are described in greater detail. The second 
Chapter reviews the 
financial and monetary developments 
in the Community 
since the beginning of Stage One 
of EMU. The third Chapter outlines the main features 
of the new monetary institutions to 
be established in accordance with the Treaty on European Union. The second part of 
the Report provides 
an overview of the structure and organisation of 
the Committee of 
Governors. PART A MOhETARY ISSUES AND THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
I. ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS Since the 
beginning of Stage One, the Committee of Governors has 
taken further 
steps to strengthen the co-ordination 
of monetary policies. In addition, the Committee has focused 
on: the monitoring of developments 
in the European Monetary System 
(EMS); the institutional requirements 
for the second and third stages 
of EMU; issues in the field of banking 
supervision and 
payment systems; and relationships with non-Community countries. The Committee 
was assisted by the Committee of Alternates, the sub-committees and working groups, 
and the 
Secretariat and Economic Unit (see Part B of the 
Report). 1. CO-ORDINATION OF MONETARY POLICIES 
The Committee 
of Governors has strengthened 
its efforts to promote the co-ordination 
of monetary policies, in accordance with its revised mandate of March 1990 (see Annex I). To this end, it has 
established a common 
framework for the 
monitoring of monetary policies, which includes regular examinations 
based on a set of commonly agreed 
and mutually consistent 
indicators. Particular emphasis has been 
placed on the enhancement 
of the forward-looking analysis 
of economic and monetary trends 
in the Community. 
Each autumn, before the final decisions 
by the national authorities, 
the Committee assesses 
the national monetary 
policy intentions for the following year. This "ex anten exercise involves, in particular, an appraisal of whether the intended 
intermediate objectives of national 
monetary policies are mutually compatible and consistent 
with the objective of downward convergence 
of inflation rates throughout the Community, taking into account 
the desire to preserve exchange rate stability. 
The forward-looking 
assessments are supplemented by "ex post" surveillance exercises in which developments 
in economic and monetary 
indicators are compared with earlier projections. 
The causes 
of deviations are examined as well as the need and scope for corrective measures. 
In addition, the Committee 
of Governors has continued its practice of 
studying in detail, once a year, developments in public finance and their 
implications for the conduct of monetary policies. 
The anten and "ex post" exercises make use 
of a set of commonly agreed indicators 
and, in addition, allow each central 
bank to take into account the assessment of the other Community central banks. To ensure the broad consistency of the national projections, 
the forward-looking appraisal 
is now based on a common set 
of assumptions on economic and financial 
prospects outside 
the Community. Attention is also being devoted to the development of Community-wide economic indicators, 
to an evaluation of 
the comparability of monetary statistics, and to 
improvements in the analytical framework for 
interpreting monetary aggregates and their 
domestic and foreign counterparts. In the latter respects, a first 
step towards improving 
the consistency of the definitions 
of broad money stocks has 
been made, paying due regard 
to differences in national financial 
structures and behaviour 
and to 
the need to maintain a 
stable relationship 
between national 
monetary aggregates and the final goals of monetary policy (see Annex 11). Some of the Member States have already 
decided to adopt the revised definitions. 
2. MONITORING EMS DEVELOPMENTS 
One of the main tasks of the Committee of Governors 
is to oversee the operation of 
the EMS. This activity includes 
the joint monitoring of current exchange 
rate and monetary policy 
developments, as 
well as the examination of all the other factors 
affecting the 
functioning of the EMS exchange rate 
mechanism. The monitoring follows a 
procedure which was established by the so-called BaslelNyborg agreement of 1987. Each month, exchange rate 
trends are examined and instruments 
used to counteract exchange market 
tensions are reviewed. This review takes account 
of economic developments and the agreement that the available 
instruments to reduce tension (intervention, 
exchange rate movements 
within the band and interest rate changes) 
should be used flexibly and concertedly to promote intra-ERM exchange rate stability. Following the move 
to Stage One 
of EMU, the Committee of Governors has 
supplemented the monthly 
monitoring exercise 
with an annual examination of the 
functioning of the EMS. The first 
examination of this kind took 
place in December 1991 and covered all 
aspects of EMS operations, 
as well as current and prospective policy issues. - 12 - Developments in the use of the private 
ECU have been monitored on 
an annual basis since 1984. 
These examinations include 
assessments of the monetary implications of the growing financial use 
of the ECU, the compatibility of measures taken 
by national and Community authorities and the significance of legal and administrative obstacles to the use of the private ECU. The importance 
of these examinations has increased given 
the rapid expansion of the market (see Chapter 
11, section 2.5) and the 
transformation of the 
present ECU basket 
into the single currency in Stage Three of 
EMU. 3. WORK RELATED TO THE MOVE 
TO THE FINAL STAGE OF 
EMU In June 1989, at its meeting 
in Madrid, the European Council asked the competent 
bodies of the 
Community, including the Committee of Governors, to carry out the preparatory work for the 
organisation of an Intergovernmental Conference to lay down the subsequent stages 
of EMU. In accordance with this mandate, the Committee of Governors submitted to the Intergovernmental Conference on EMU, on 27th November 1990, its proposal 
for a Statute of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) 
and of the 
European Central 
Bank (ECB). In the course of the Intergovernmental Conference, the Committee 
of Governors added provisions covering more 
technical aspects, as well as for 
the arrangements for the transition to 
the final stage of EMU. Furthermore, on 30th October 1991, the Committee of Governors submitted its proposal 
for the Statute of the European Monetary 
Institute (EMI). In addition to this 
preparatory work, the Committee of Governors followed the developments 
at the 
Intergovernmental Conference closely and provided advice in the areas of its competence. 
In accordance with the consultation procedure foreseen in Article 
102 A 
of the EC Treaty, in November 1991, the Committee expressed 
its opinion on the Dutch Presidency's proposal for a Treaty on EMU. The Committee 
of Governors has noted with satisfaction that its preparatory work was well received by the Intergovernmental Conference and that the texts agreed 
upon by the Heads of State 
or of Government in Maastricht in December 1991 reflected closely 
the proposals of the 
Committee (see Chapter 
111). 4. ISSUES IN THE FIELD OF BANKING SUPERVISION AND 
PAYMENT SYSTEMS The revised mandate 
requires the 
Committee of Governors to hold consultations on those issues affecting the 
stability of financial institutions and markets 
which fall within the competence of the central banks. In this context, the Committee 
has examined certain issues 
arising in the field of 
banking supervision and payment 
systems. In the banking supervisory 
field, the Committee 
of Governors has considered a range 
of institution-specific aspects. In particular, the closure of BCCI 
has led the Committee 
to review the implications of this case for 
international banking supervision in conjunction with the competent supervisory 
bodies. In addition, work centred on two major topics. The first concerned the supervision of conglomerates containing a 
bank. In particular, the possible lack of transparency of a 
group's structure and operations can make it 
difficult for 
supervisors to 
take a group-wide 
financial view. This is particularly important given 
the possible risks 
of contagion from problems arising in one part of a conglomerate. A need 
was identified for banking supervisors to 
have discussions with other regulators, especially with those supervising insurance and securities 
markets. The other main theme has been 
the definition of a common 
understanding on the application 
of the Second Banking 
Co-ordination Directive, which 
is due to come into force on 1st January 1993. Before 
this date, a number 
of practical problems need to be resolved. These concern 
the respective future responsibilities of supervisors both in the countries where banking institutions are 
operating and in those where their head 
office is located. 
In this context, valuable technical assistance 
has been 
provided by the "Groupe de Contact" an informal group of 
senior EEC 
banking supervisors. 
In the area of pawlent systems, a number 
of aspects have 
been studied by the Committee of Governors; part of this work is 
currently being prepared by a working group 
which has been 
established on an ad hoc basis. The first 
issue concerns the 
design and operation 
of the ECU Clearing and Settlement 
System, in particular the 
question of whether current procedures 
satisfy the minimum 
standards laid down as a result of the G-10 work on interbank netting schemes. Prior to their 
implementation, the Committee of 
Governors examined the 
intermediation facilities 
provided by the BIS and 
by some national central banks to 
ensure a smooth operation 
of the 
daily clearing. The second aspect relates to the development of payment systems in the context of the 
Single Market and against the 
background of EMU. Work currently being performed is essentially of 
an exploratory nature and 
the Committee of Governors expects to draw some preliminary 
conclusions in the next few months. In addition, the Committee of Governors 
expressed its views on 
the Commission's Discussion Paper "Making Payments in the Internal Market" 
(COM(90)447). Further discussions are now taking place in the Commission's Consultative Group 
on which the Committee of Governors 
is represented by delegates from national central banks. RELATIONSHIPS WITH CENTRAL 
BANKS OUTSIDE THE COMMUNITY 
The Committee 
of Governors 
has continued 
to promote the co-operation with respect to 
developments in exchange markets 
between Community central 
banks and 
the central banks of the 
United States, Canada, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, 
Austria and Switzerland. This co-operation 
provides an important channel of 
information and concerns the pooling of 
data on exchange market developments, intervention and other 
official foreign exchange 
transactions in the so-called "concertation 
proceduren. Moreover, the 
Committee of 
Governors has continued the arrangements with Norges Bank agreed 
in 1984, which provide for regular 
consultations on matters of common interest. In December 1990, following 
the decision taken by the Norwegian authorities to 
peg their currency to 
the ECU, the 
Community central banks agreed 
to extend the bilateral 
co-operation with Norges Bank and concluded bilateral 
swap agreements 
governed by uniform conditions. These 
swap agreements, 
which were renewed at their maturity on 31st December 1991, give Norges Bank 
access to short-term funds for 
intervention purposes 
up to 
the equivalent 
of ECU 2 billion. 
A number of countries outside 
the EMS have established unilateral 
links with the ECU since the start of 
Stage One. Norway (as from 22nd October 1990). Sweden (17th May 1991) and Finland (7th June 
1991) unilaterally pegged their currencies 
to the ECU. With the Austrian Schilling pegged to the Deutsche Mark for many 
years, the move by the three Scandinavian countries 
extended further the 
zone of stable exchange 
rate parities in Europe. 6. CO-OPERATION WITH 
OTHER COMMUNITY BODIES 
In the performance of its tasks and 
functions, the Committee of Governors has 
collaborated with other Community bodies. 
Firstly, the Chairman of the Committee of Governors has attended the Council 
meetings devoted to the multilateral surveillance of member countries' economic policies and 
expressed the 
Committee's views on the consistency 
between monetary and other economic 
policies. In addition, the Governors participated in the informal ECOFIN Council meetings. 
Secondly, the Chairman was invited in March 1991 to attend a meeting of the European Parliament Committee 
on economic and monetary matters and industrial policy. The Chairman informed 
the Committee of the Governors' work on the Statute of the ESCB and 
of the ECB 
as well as on the measures taken 
to strengthen monetary 
policy co-ordination. Thirdly, close co-operation 
with the Commission of the European Communities has continued. Commission representatives attended the meetings of the Committee of Governors and of the Committee 
of Alternates, as well as most of the meetings 
of the sub-committees 
and working groups. Fourthly, the Committee of Governors has contributed to the 
work of the Committee 
on monetary, financial and balance-of-payments statistics which was created by a Council Decision 
in February 1991. A member of the Secretariat has permanent observer status 
on this Committee, whose work 
aims at improving the consistency of statistical data. 
Finally, the Committee of Governors has closely followed 
the work of the Monetary Committee. 
Links with this Committee are 
ensured by the central bank representatives, who 
in most cases are the Alternates 
of the 
Governors. 11. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
AND MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION 
1. THE ECONOMIC BACKGROUND TO MONETARY POLICY 
After the 
strong upswing in the late 1980s, economic growth in the Community as a 
whole has slowed down sharply over 
the last 
two years. However, there have 
been marked differences 
in the experience of individual 
countries. Whereas economic conditions 
in western Germany 
remained buoyant, growth decelerated 
elsewhere in the Community (see Table 
1). Nevertheless, inflation, which had risen in most countries in the period of rapid demand 
growth, is 
proving hard 
to eradicate (see 
Table 2). During 1991, the average inflation rate 
in the Community fell, although 
in many countries 
the decline was quite modest, 
and in some traditionally low-inflation 
countries inflation 
quickened. Economic 
conditions in the rest of the 
world, as well as German unification 
and other factors internal to 
the Community, account for 
these developments. 
1.1 External environment Since the middle 
of 1990, world 
economic activity has weakened 
more sharply than first expected, 
thus reducing 
the demand for 
Community exports and dampening growth in 
the Community. As private sector confidence 
was dented by the Gulf crisis, 
the United States 
economy slipped into recession in late 1990 and early 1991. Signs of a 
subsequent turnaround have been uneven 
and fragile: indications of some 
improvement have often 
been shortly followed 
by other signals suggesting protracted 
weakness. The 
resulting uncertainty 
surrounding prospects 
for US monetary policy and 
expected interest rate differentials against 
other major currencies 
triggered sharp swings in the dollar exchange rate. In the event, slow 
monetary growth, 
as well as other signs that inflationary pressures 
were abating, led the Federal Reserve to ease monetary 
policy on a number of occasions throughout 
the period, 
reducing short-term interest rates to 
the present low level. Elsewhere, the economic cycle in Japan lagged behind 
that of the North American 
economies and has been less pronounced, while 
in EFTA markets, 
which account for 
a greater proportion 
of Community exports than the United States 
and Japan combined, 
demand conditions have been 
subdued. Eastern Europe accounts 
for only 
a small share 
of Community countries' trade at present, and hence the reform 
process and the 
problems of the 
former USSR have 
had relatively little 
direct economic impact 
on the TABLE 1: DEVELOPMENTS IN REAL GDP 
Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: 
OECD a) Estimates b) GNP TABLE 2: DEVELOPMENTS IN CONSUMER PRICE 
INFLATION Source: BIS; National Data Belgium Denmark Germany (western) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal 
United Kingdom EEC : average ERM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States Japan 12 months Dec.90 3.5 1.9 2.8 22.8 6.5 3.4 2.7 6.6 4.4 2.7 13.7 9.3 5.8 5.3 4.0 6.1 3.8 percentage change over 
the to Dec.91 2.8 2.3 4.2 17.8 5.5 3.1 3.6 
6.1 2.6 4.9 9.6 
4.5 4.8 4.5 4.3 3.1 
2.7 1986-88 average 1.3 4.1 0.5 17.7 6.3 2.8 3.0 
5.2 0.6 0.0 10.3 4.2 3.6 3.2 2.5 3.2 0.5 previous 1989 3.1 4.8 2.8 13.7 6.8 3.6 4.0 6.3 3.4 1.1 12.6 7.8 5.3 5.0 3.9 4.8 2.3 year 1990 3.5 2.6 2.7 20.4 6.7 3.4 3.4 6.5 3.7 2.5 13.4 9.5 5.7 5.3 3.9 5.4 3.1 - 1991 3.2 2.4 
3.5 18.9 5.9 3.1 3.2 
6.4 3.1 3.9 11.4 5.9 5.1 4.7 4.2 4.3 3.3 Community. However, given 
the geo-political ties between the 
regions and 
prospects of growing 
economic integration, Community 
financial markets have 
from time to time been 
affected by developments in the eastern 
bloc. The slowdown in the world 
economy has contributed to a reduction in global inflation. Non-oil commodity prices fell sharply 
in the second half of 
1990 to their lowest level for 
around three 
years and remained 
subdued through 1991. The oil 
price hike in the autumn of 
1990 was short-lived, and 
in 1991 the average dollar price 
was only a little higher 
than the level 
preceding the Gulf crisis. Furthermore, profit margins 
on traded manufactured goods have 
been squeezed, as companies have 
tried to maintain market 
shares on both domestic and export 
markets. Weak 
world trade prices have 
helped to moderate inflation 
in the Community. 1.2 German unification The unification 
of Germany 
in the second half of 1990 has had a 
profound economic impact, not 
only in Germany, but also in the rest 
of the Community. Unification has given 
rise to a large fiscal expansion to 
support incomes and 
to encourage investment 
in eastern Germany during 
the difficult adjustment period. Output in eastern Germany has plummeted, although 
tentative signs have recently emerged that a 
pick-up is 
underway. Despite the collapse in domestic production, eastern German demand rose 
sharply following unification, 
financed largely 
by government transfers. This surge in demand came 
at a time 
when the western German 
economy was already operating at a high level 
of capacity. Consequently, the 
stimulus not only boosted output in Germany but also supported activity in other Member States. The surge in demand led to a sharp 
increase in German imports 
and a 
diversion of exports 
in 1990 and the first half of 
1991 and, as 
a result, all Community countries have 
improved their bilateral 
trade position with 
Germany, in some cases by well over 1% of GDP. 
At the same 
time, the strong 
demand in Germany fuelled 
domestic inflationary pressures. 
These pressures have been countered 
by a series 
of increases in interest rates, which have 
also affected interest rate 
conditions elsewhere 
in the Community. 
1.3 Economic performance and 
nominal convernence in the Community In spite of the surge 
in output in western Germany, the 
cyclical downturn in the Community as a whole has proved sharper than foreseen in mid-1990. This reflected the marked slowdown in external markets and weaker 
domestic spending, as real 
interest rates remained 
high and private sector 
confidence recovered 
only slowly after the 
Gulf War. Following six years 
of relatively strong growth, real GDP 
in the Community increased by only 1.1% in 1991, the lowest rate 
since 1982. As activity weakened, unemployment 
in the Community began to 
rise. Developments at the 
aggregate level mask 
an increased cyclical 
divergence between the individual Member 
States. Although growth weakened 
through 1991, the level 
of economic 
activity in western Germany has 
remained high, in marked contrast 
to the recession experienced in the United Kingdom. 
In the other 
countries, growth has 
slowed sharply, although 
it remained above 2% in Spain, Luxembourg and Portugal. The only exception 
to the 
slowdown was Greece where 
economic activity recovered 
marginally. Since the 
start of Stage One, 
the average rate 
of inflation and 
the dispersion across 
countries have narrowed modestly. 
For 1991 as a whole, consumer price inflation in the Community 
on a weighted basis fell only to around 5%, well 
above the 
rates of under 
4% experienced in the period from 1986 to 1988. 
Although external influences and the slowdown in economic activity have 
generally been 
conducive to inflation reduction, 
persistently strong growth 
in wages and inadequate fiscal consolidation in 
many countries hindered more 
significant progress (see 
Tables 3 and 4). In addition, structural rigidities, including insufficient flexibility 
in labour markets, continue to hamper the disinflationary 
process. In the high-inflation countries, the 
rate of increase of prices 
was much lower in sectors open to foreign 
competition than in the more sheltered parts of the 
economy. The convergence 
of price performance in the Community has 
been partly of 
the wrong 
kind, as inflation 
rates have risen significantly 
in Germany and 
the Netherlands, the Community countries with the best historical record in terms of 
price stability. This 
deterioration reflected a marked 
pick-up in wage settlements as well 
as increases in taxes and 
other public sector prices. 
With the exception of Italy, where 
the average rate of price increase 
in 1991 was 
essentially unchanged, the other 
Community countries 
succeeded in lowering inflation in 1991, although to 
varying extents. In the five countries (Belgium, Denmark, France, 
Ireland and Luxembourg) which, 
together with Germany and the Netherlands, 
had relatively low rates of inflation in 1990, the improvement was limited to a maximum of 0.5 percentage point and 
in most cases 
was less. Denmark had 
the TABLE 3: WAGE DEVELOPMENTS 
(Compensation per Employee) a) Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: OECD Belgium Denmark Germany (western) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom EEC : average EM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States c) Japan c) a) Whole economy; increase in nominal 
terms. b) Estimates 
c) Data covers the business sector 
only, and may thus not 
be directly comparable 
with the data for the 
EEC countries. previous year 1991 b) 5.4 3.2 6.2 16.1 8.7 4.7 7.0 8.3 4.7 4.4 17.8 8.2 7.1 6.8 6.1 4.0 3.8 percentage 1986-88 average 2.9 5.7 3.2 13.9 7.7 4.6 5.4 8.2 3.7 2.2 17.6 8.2 6.1 5.8 4.9 4.3 3.2 change 1989 3.6 3.8 3.0 17.8 6.3 
4.6 6.5 8.7 6.5 0.8 16.4 9.1 6.2 5.9 4.9 2.9 3.9 over the 
1990 5.9 3.4 4.7 20.0 7.9 5.4 3.8 10.4 5.2 3.3 18.4 9.7 7.5 7.1 6.3 3.8 4.5 TABLE 4: GENERAL GOVERNMENT BORROWING REQUIREMENTS a) a) Negative numbers indicate a 
fiscal surplus. 
b) Estimates c) Up to 1989 western Germany only; 
1990 on the basis of all German borrowing requirement over 
western German GDP; 1991 on the basis of figures of all 
Germany. lowest rate of inflation 
in 1991 at 
2.4%. Elsewhere, against 
a background 
of weak economic activity, inflation fell 
dramatically in the United Kingdom following 
sterling's entry into the ERM; in Spain, the rate declined steadily, 
but only slowly; and in Greece and Portugal, average inflation in 1991 dropped by between 1 and 2 percentage points, although 
a much sharper decline 
was recorded through the year. The trend towards a 
gradual reduction in fiscal deficits 
in the late 1980s 
has been reversed in the past two 
years in some countries. Although the deficit 
remained low in several countries, the combined 
deficit at the general 
government level rose 
from around 3% of Community 
GDP in 1989 to some 4.5% in 1990, and remained 
near that level 
in 1991. The deterioration in budgetary performance can be attributed to several factors: German unification; 
the slowdown in economic growth; and, in some countries, to slippage in the control of government spending. 
Differences in the budgetary positions of Member States 
remain substantial 
(see Chart 2). While five 
countries had general government 
deficits under 3% of GDP in 1991, at the other end of 
the spectrum the 
deficit was around 10% in Italy, and around 
15% in 
Greece. The levels 
of public sector 
debt diverge markedly and 
in three Community countries 
remain above 
100% of GDP. Current-account imbalances in Germany and the 
United Kingdom have 
narrowed markedly 
over the past 
two years (see Table 5). In Germany, the fiscal expansion 
associated with unification has 
absorbed the previously 
large national 
savings surplus, with the 
current account moving from a surplus of almost 
5% of GDP in 1989 to a deficit of over 
1% in 1991. In the United Kingdom, the 
recovery of personal sector savings 
and the 
cutback in corporate investment have 
been reflected 
in a marked decline 
in the current-account deficit. In Greece the deficit fell 
from over 5% of GDP in 
1990 to 2% in 1991. Elsewhere in the Community, a sizable current-account deficit persisted 
in Spain, financed by substantial long-term 
capital inflows attracted by profitable investment opportunities. 
The Netherlands has continued to 
record a large current-account surplus. 
2. MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE 
DEVELOPMENTS In Stage One, although the responsibility for monetary 
policy remains at the national level, the liberalisation of 
capital flows 
and b) General Government 
Borrowing Requirement, 1991 (National Sources) CHART 2: BUDGETARY POSITIONS IN THE 
COMMUNITY (per cent of nominal GDPIGNP) 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 20° PUBLIC 1 40 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 a) Gross Debt 
of General Government, end of 1990 (Commission Sources) BUDGET DEFICIT 
b) DEBT a) - - BE - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - LU . 1 I -5 0 5 10 15 I I I TABLE 5: CURRENT ACCOUNT OF THE BALANCE OF 
PAYMENTS a) Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: OECD Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Germany c) d) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom EEC : average ERM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States c) Japan c) a) Negative numbers indicate a deficit 
b) Estimates c) In per cent of nominal GNP d) Up to June 
1990 western Germany 
only. per 1986-88 average 2.3 -3.2 4.3 -2.9 0.3 -0.2 0.2 -0.1 2.3 
0.9 -1.7 0.8 0.8 1.5 -3.2 3.5 cent of 1989 2.3 -1.1 4.8 -4.7 -2.9 -0.5 1.5 -1.2 3.8 0.4 -4.7 0.0 0.1 1.5 -2.0 2.0 nominal GDP 1990 1.9 1.1 3.1 -5.4 -3.4 -0.7 3.4 -1.3 3.9 -0.1 -3.2 -0.2 -0.1 0.9 -1.7 1.2 1991 b) 
2.0 1.7 -1.2 -2.1 -3.0 -0.5 4.8 -1.7 3.9 -1.1 -1.2 -0.9 -0.8 -0.5 -0.1 2.1 rapid financial integration have 
strengthened the interdependence between national policies 
in the context of the ERM. Most indicators suggest that 
monetary policies have been firm since the start of Stage One and have 
thus generally favoured 
progress towards lower 
inflation in an 
environment of stable exchange rates 
between Community currencies. 
However, in many Member 
States wage and fiscal 
developments have not 
provided sufficient support 
to monetary policy. 2.1 The stance of monetary ~olicy Due to the long and variable lags in the transmission of monetary policy, the monetary 
stance must 
be appraised on the basis of 
medium-run trends. Developments in monetary aggregates and interest rates 
provide useful evidence for this assessment. 
Monetary amregates Growth rates 
of the 
key broad monetary aggregates have 
moderated in most countries over the last 
two years (see 
Table 6). A deceleration is also evident in the broad monetary aggregates which 
have been harmonised 
for the internal use 
of the Committee of 
Governors (see Annex 11). The slowdown in monetary growth, although 
partly reflecting the weakening in 
economic activity, indicates that monetary policies tended 
to exert downward pressure on inflation. In the countries 
which announce targets, monetary growth has 
generally been 
within or close to the published ranges over 
this period 
(see Table 
7). However, in Germany, monetary growth accelerated 
in late 1991, fuelled by buoyant credit 
demand, and as a 
result the target was 
exceeded. In Spain, the overshooting in 1991 partly reflected capital inflows. In an environment of stable exchange rate 
expectations and 
liberalised capital movements, 
these inflows ultimately 
stemmed from the substantial government 
borrowing requirement. 
A similar mechanism 
led to an overshooting in Italy in 1990 and Portugal 
in 1991. Furthermore, shifts in portfolio behaviour, often 
related to financial deregulation and innovation 
or to changes 
in taxation, partly accounted for deviations 
from targets in both directions, 
as experienced in Greece, Spain, France and 
Italy. The 
avoidance of distortions from financial 
shifts was one 
of the important factors behind the revisions in the national definitions 
of broad money in 
several countries. 
TABLE 6: DEVELOPMENTS IN BROAD MONETARY AGGREGATES a) Source: BIS and National 
Data Belgium Denmark Germany b ) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom United States Japan a) National definitions of broad money stocks 
are not suffi- 
ciently similar to be aggregated at the Community 
level (see Annex 11). The following aggregates have been selected: 
Belgium: M4e; Denmark: M National; Germany: M3; Greece: M3; Spain: (new) ALP; France: (new) M3; Ireland: M3; Italy: M2; Netherlands: M3; Portugal: L-; United Kingdom: M4; United States: M2; Japan: M2tCD. b) Up to 
1990, western Germany only. 
4th quarter/4th 1986-88 average 9.8 5.9 6.7 22.4 14.2 8.4 4.8 9.1 4.8 20.3 16.5 6.2 10.2 quarter 1989 10.5 4.3 4.7 23.8 15.3 9.1 4.6 8.8 13.0 7.7 18.9 4.7 10.5 percentage 1990 6.9 8.1 5.6 15.1 
10.4 8.1 16.7 9.9 6.8 16.0 12.1 3.8 9.2 change 1991 7.3 5.7 5.2 7.2 11.3 4.1 5.2 8.3 
5.8 15.0 5.5 2.7 3.1 TABLE 7. MONETARY TARGETS AND OUTTURNS a) A. Countries setting targets for 
money supply 
growth Target 1990 1991 1992 Variable Target Outturn Target outturn Target Germany M3 4-6 5.6 3-5 b) 5.2 3.5-5.5 Greece M3 19-21 14.2 14-16 11.7 
(8.3) e) 9-12 d) Spain M 3 
- - - 7-11 d) ALP 6.5-9.5 11.3 7-11 12.1 (10.9) e) 8-11 d) France M2 3.5-5.5 -0.5 
- - - M3 - - 5-7 d) 4.1 4-6 Italy M2 6-9 9.9 5-8 8.9 5-7 d) Portugal M 3 
- - - - 12-15 d) L - - 11.5 12 15.2 12-16 United Kingdom MO 1-5 2.5 0-4 2.8 December c) - B. Countries setting targets for the domestic source 
of money supply growth r--' Target 1990 1991 1992 Variable Target Outturn Target outturn Target Denmark DMC f) - -0.9 4-7 1.3 4-7 Netherlands Bank's DMC 
f) 6 6 7-8 11.0 7-8 Source: National Data "-" target not set 
a) Targets are set for 
a calendar year (4th 
qrt./4th qrt. or Dec./Dec.) except in the 
UK (March/March). The 1990 and 1991 outturn columns report the corresponding 
growth rate of the respective 
variable. No monetary 
target is set in 
Belgium, Ireland and Luxembourg. b) Revised from 
4-6% at the mid-year target review. 
c) Annualised percentage change 
between the 
base period and 
the last month. 
d) Target refers to a revised definition of the aggregate. e) Figures in 
parentheses show the 1991 
outturn for the revised definition to be used in 1992. f) Domestic money creation 
(Denmark: growth in 
"Lending to residents in domestic currency + Stock of bonds denominated in domestic currency 
- Special deposits". Netherlands: growth in "Lending 
to domestic private 
sector + long-term lending to domestic government 
- domestic non-monetary liabilities"). Interest rates 
In the two years 
prior to Stage One, there had 
been a significant tightening of monetary 
policies in the Community 
to counter the revival 
of inflationary pressure stemming 
from rapid demand growth. 
Through 1988 and 1989, three-month nominal 
interest rates rose 
on average by around 3 percentage points, 
with particularly strong 
increases in the United Kingdom and Spain, where 
the overheating 
of the economy was most pronounced (see Chart 3). The rise 
in short-term rates 
in this period exceeded 
the increase in inflation. In the countries whose currencies participate 
in the narrow 
band of the ERM, short-term rates have remained rather high subsequently. Indeed, in Germany and the Netherlands rates 
have risen 
significantly over 
the eighteen months under 
review. In the other narrow-band members, 
rates in late 1991 had returned to their mid-1990 levels, although 
there had been 
some broadly offsetting swings 
in interest rates during the interim 
(see Chart 4). At the end of 1990, a general upward 
movement in short-term interest rates 
was triggered by concerns about unfavourable 
price movements, arising 
partly from the oil price hike in connection with the Gulf crisis, 
but also from adverse wage developments and widening 
budget deficits, especially in Germany. With oil prices 
returning quickly to 
the pre-Gulf levels 
in early 1991, most 
Community countries sought to 
lower short-term interest rates, although rates 
remained broadly unchanged 
in Germany and the Netherlands, as 
strong inflationary pressures continued. 
In the other countries 
participating in the narrow band, inflationary 
forces were receding and growth 
prospects deteriorating, and, as exchange 
market sentiment supported greater convergence 
in the level of nominal 
interest rates, official interest rates were 
reduced significantly 
towards the lower 
German levels. As a result, interest rate 
differentials vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark declined to 
historically low levels and in some cases were 
largely eliminated 
in the first half of 1991 (see Chart 3). During the second half, the 
persistence of inflationary pressures 
and strong monetary 
growth in Germany led to further increases 
in official interest rates. As foreign exchange market 
sentiment suggested 
that limits to 
the reduction of interest rate differentials 
had been reached, 
the increases in German interest rates 
were accompanied by increases in the other narrow-band 
countries; in some cases interest 
differentials temporarily widened. 
z 2 0, Q) (D W 01 awu owzl- CHART 4: RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN INTEREST RATES BELGIUM DENMARK 3 M. DOMESTIC .-..- BONDS GERMANY I 12 GREECE - 3 M. DOMESTIC BONDS FRANCE - - 3M.DOMEsTIC - .---- BONDS - - - - - - ., - - - - - - - 11111111111 11111111111 11111111111 CHART 4: (continued) IRELAND 13 NETHERLANDS 3 M. DOMESTIC -m--- BONDS P 10 10 UNITED KINGDOM ITALY 15 - 3 M DOMESTIC - --..- BONDS - - - - - - - - - Illllllllll 11111111111 11l11111111 PORTUGAL 17 17 EEC (Weighted avg.) and USA l3 l l3 - EEC. 3 M. DOMESTIC . . 
. . . 
EEC BONDS USA. 3 M. DOMESTIC . - -. . USA: BONDS 4 89 90 91 In the two 
countries - the United 
Kingdom and Spain - whose currencies participate 
in the wide band of the 
ERM and 
where interest rates had risen particularly strongly 
in 1988-89, short-term rates have 
been reduced substantially 
since the start of Stage 
One. The decline 
reflected progress in reducing inflation and, 
in the case of Spain, also 
the strength 
of the 
peseta. In the second half of 
1991, there were signs that 
limits to the narrowing of interest rate 
differentials between the pound sterling and the narrow-band currencies were 
being approached. Outside the ERM, short-term 
rates rose sharply in Portugal and 
Greece in the second half of 1990. Rates have 
remained high through 1991 to signal the 
authorities' determination 
to bring inflation closer to 
the levels elsewhere 
in the Community. 
Long-term interest 
rates in the Community 
had also risen 
in 1988-89, but 
the increases were 
less pronounced than those 
of short-term rates, resulting 
in flatter, and in some cases 
inverted, yield 
curves (see Charts 4 and 5). Between the middle of 
1990 and 
the end of 1991, long-term 
rates fell 
in the narrow-band countries. The decline, however, 
was smallest in Germany and the 
Netherlands and 
hence long-term interest rate 
differentials also narrowed, albeit to 
a lesser extent than the differentials in the money markets. As with short-term rates, long-term 
rates came 
down more sharply in Spain and the United Kingdom. 
Long-term rates have also fallen markedly 
in Portugal. Although various factors 
may influence long-term interest rates, 
their decline suggests that expectations of future inflation 
decreased. Long-term rates have fallen 
further in early 1992. 2.2 Exchange rate 
developments in the ERM The most notable feature of recent exchange 
market developments has been the stability 
of conditions 
within the ERM. This stands 
in marked contrast to the global 
environment of large, and at times erratic, movements of 
the exchange rates of 
third currencies vis-h-vis the ERM currencies (see Chart 
6). Participation in the ERM was extended in October 1990 when the pound sterling joined the 
mechanism, with a fluctuation margin 
of *6%. The ERM has functioned smoothly since 
the start 
of Stage One and the occasional periods of tension have not 
seriously threatened 
the maintenance of central parities. The overall stability 
of the system is all 
the more striking in the light of various 
factors which could have 
resulted CHART5: LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES IN ERM COUNTRIES *) ORIGINAL NARROW BAND COUNTRIES 15 ,., BELGIUM ...... DENMARK - GERMANY - ,,,, FRANCE ............ IRELAND . NETHERLANDS .L. -. . . -. . . 
. . 
. . . * . . 
- OTHER ERM 
COUNTRIES *) Government or public sector bonds 
in more extensive exchange rate tensions. 
These include 
the volatility of the US dollar; the 
considerable uncertainty associated 
with the Gulf crisis; political and economic upheaval 
in Central and Eastern Europe; 
and the divergence between 
the cyclical positions of 
Community countries. 
Possible explanations for the increase 
in stability of 
exchange rates are 
discussed in the next 
section. The behaviour of individual currencies suggests 
that nominal 
interest rate 
differentials have been a 
major factor determining exchange 
rate movements 
in the fluctuation band, with high yielding currencies often 
approaching the upper margin 
(see Chart 
7). In the wide band, 
the Spanish 
peseta remained consistently 
in the upper half of its fluctuation 
margin, sometimes reaching the upper 
intervention rate. In the narrow band, 
the Italian lira 
was often the strongest currency. 
When interest rates 
firmed in Germany during 
the second half of 1990 and again 
in 1991, the Deutsche Mark moved into 
the upper part of the narrow band, 
accompanied by the Dutch guilder and the Belgian 
franc. In contrast, in France and Denmark, where 
the authorities lowered interest rates 
when possible, their respective 
currencies tended to remain 
in the lower part of the 
narrow band. Some exchange rate strains have arisen, however, 
when market participants considered that interest rate 
differentials did not correspond to perceived exchange 
risks. On two occasions, in the summer 
of 1990 and the spring of 1991, high-yielding 
currencies (the Spanish peseta, 
joined in the first instance 
by the Italian lira) were for a time at, or close to, 
their respective upper intervention limits 
against a currency or currencies with relatively low interest rates (the French franc, 
joined in the first instance by the Deutsche Mark 
and the Dutch guilder). In late 1990, the currencies of 
some ERM countries in relatively weak cyclical positions came 
under downward 
pressure as the Deutsche 
Mark strengthened in response to 
higher German interest rates 
and the weakness 
of the US dollar. Finally, there were tensions in late 1991 related to the 
increase in German rates. Episodes of tension were 
quickly countered 
by the monetary authorities 
by intra-marginal interventions, 
interest rate changes and movements in the band. 2.3 Factors behind ERM stability A major reason for 
the smooth operation of the 
ERM over this 
period has been the 
assessment by market participants that prospects for the maintenance of exchange rate parities had improved. 
This development 
is - CHART 7: POSITIONS OF ERM CURRENCIES Weekly averages 
of percentage deviations 
from central rates a) 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 1 1 0 0 -1 -1 1989 1990 1991 a) The distance between 
two currencies represents 
the percentage difference between 
their market exchange rate and their bilateral 
central parity. 
The Spanish peseta and 
the British pound entered the 
ERM wide band in June 1989 
and October 1990, respectively. 
b) In January 1990, the Italian lira 
entered the narrow band, 
and its central rate was adjusted downwards, 
while keeping unchanged 
the lower limit of the band. 
in turn linked to the 
effective policy 
measures taken 
by the national central banks to counter periods 
of tensions. As market participants expected authorities to 
counteract exchange 
market tensions, 
the incentive to take foreign exchange 
positions in favour of a 
realignment was 
reduced. As a result, the 
stabilising properties of 
the system were reinforced. While difficult 
to assess and 
to quantify, evidence from 
two sources suggests that market 
expectations of a 
realignment diminished in the period under review. A first 
indicator, which sheds some light 
on short-run expectations, is 
the forward 
exchange rate. If the forward exchange rate is 
outside the 
maximum range allowed 
by the fluctuation band, 
this can be interpreted 
as signalling the expectations 
of a realignment over the relevant 
time horizon. 
Indeed, the above indicator using 
the twelve-month forward 
rates vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark suggests that market 
expectations of a realignment 
have been 
the lowest since the inception 
of the EMS (see Chart 
8). A second indicator of exchange 
rate expectations is provided by long-term interest rate differentials, 
which supply information on the credibility of parities 
over a longer period. Although the differential 
should be 
interpreted with caution because of 
the different 
rnaturities, fiscal treatment and 
liquidity of the bonds being compared, the progressive 
reduction in long-term interest rate differentials vis-8-vis the Deutsche Mark during Stage 
One again suggests stronger 
market confidence 
in the maintenance of central parities in the ERM (see Chart 
5). Strengthened market 
confidence may be ascribed 
to several factors, some reflecting structural 
and political developments as well as 
others of 
a conjunctural nature. Firstly, the absence of a 
general realignment since 
January 1987 demonstrates policy-makers' growing 
awareness of the 
potential drawbacks of changes 
in parities, both 
in terms of the resulting 
inflationary stimulus 
and the damage to the credibility 
of their "hard currency policyn. Moreover, the removal 
of capital controls and 
the political momentum towards EMU have further 
added to confidence 
in the authorities* commitment 
to exchange rate stability. Secondly, differences 
in inflation performance in the Community have declined, and 
the largest current-account imbalances 
in countries participating 
in the ER. have narrowed. Finally, market 
perceptions of the impact 
of German unification 
tended to reduce 
the relative strength 
of the Deutsche Mark 
in the ERM for much of this 
period, easing the pressures on other currencies associated 
7 V) 2 G , m .c IS) 0 m C 'D 9 5 C so > c 0 'D .= a, m IS) = m ti - c 2 a, - U - & S Q% m a, z a, Q 2 5 IS) UJ 6': 5 2 3 Q 2 c 2 L% .2 a, fn = E { .- - a, a, g: - with the maintenance 
of high interest 
rates in Germany. However, the Deutsche Mark regained its relative strength in the ERM in the second half of 1991, as the Deutsche Bundesbank raised official 
interest rates twice to 
reaffirm its determination 
to continue a stability-oriented 
monetary policy. Monetary authorities have also fostered stability 
by reacting quickly and 
effectively to episodes of exchange 
market tensions. Policy 
responses complied with the principles of the 
1987 Basle-Nyborg Agreement, 
which calls on the authorities to make flexible 
and co-ordinated use of interest rate changes, intervention, 
and the scope 
for movement within 
the band. The relative importance 
of the instruments employed differed from 
country to country, depending on 
the authorities' 
assessment of the source of the tensions and 
of the likely impact of the policy 
change on domestic economic conditions. 
While in some countries - such as Belgium and the 
Netherlands - the authorities relied primarily 
on changes in interest rates, in others - such as Italy 
and the United 
Kingdom - the scope 
for exchange rate movements within 
the band has been 
used more actively. The 
intensity and frequency of foreign exchange market intervention also 
differed, but 
it is noteworthy that intervention 
was in general accompanied by the use of 
other instruments. 
2.4 Exchange rate policies of 
non-ERM countries 
Portugal and Greece have 
strengthened to different degrees 
the links between 
their currencies and those participating 
in the ERM to assist 
the fight against inflation and 
to prepare the ground 
for eventual 
entry into the mechanism (see 
Chart 9). With effect from 1st October 1990, 
Portugal abandoned its long-standing crawling-peg 
policy and 
allowed the escudo to fluctuate within 
an undisclosed band against a basket of 
ERM currencies. The high interest 
rate differential 
in favour of the 
escudo attracted large capital inflows, 
complicating monetary management and 
contributing to 
an overshooting of 
the monetary 
target. This 
was counteracted by the temporary re-imposition of controls on short-term capital flows. In Greece foreign exchange 
policy is also geared 
towards inflation reduction. Drachma depreciation 
no longer fully offsets 
the inflation and 
labour cost differentials 
vis-8-vis major trading partners, 
thus adding 
to competitive pressures in the economy. 
CHART 9: EXCHANGE RATES 
OF THE 
GREEK DRACHMA 
AND PORTUGUESE ESCUDO *) (AGAINST ERM CURRENCIES) Greek drachma 
Portuguese escudo 
*) Percentage deviation from the level 
of July 1990 (increase = appreciation of GRD or 
PTE) ERM corresponds to a 
weighted average of the ERM currencies 
(using normalised ECU weights). 
2.5 Develo~ments in the Private 
ECU The official ECU, defined as a currency 
basket composed of 
specific amounts of the currencies 
of the EEC Member 
States, came into 
existence in March 1979 at the inception 
of the EMS. It is used 
within the EMS to express the central 
exchange rate 
of participating currencies, to denominate certain claims 
and liabilities, and as a reserve instrument. The 
introduction of the official ECU 
has stimulated the 
evolution of a market 
in private ECUs, created by commercial banks. This market 
is being used 
on a significant 
and growing scale by public authorities and by the private sector. To date, 
the most important usage of 
the private ECU has been 
in financial domain (see Table 8). The ECU still has to make 
a breakthrough 
in the non-financial sphere; its use as 
an invoicing currency 
and as a means 
of settlement of non-financial transactions remains 
very limited. There is a substantial bond market denominated 
in private ECUs, with outstanding bonds amounting 
to ECU 110 billion at the end of September 1991. The share 
of total 
international bond issues denominated in ECU has been rising sharply; it was 12% in the first nine months of 1991 (compared with 34% for the US dollar and 11% for the Japanese 
yen), making it the second 
most commonly-used 
currency for international 
bond issuance in that period. Furthermore, there is a sizable market 
in short-term ECU 
securities, both in the form of Treasury bills 
and commercial 
paper. The ECU banking market has also attained a significant 
scale, with nearly ECU 
180 billion of 
lending outstanding 
at end-September 1991, of which ECU 
46 billion represented loans to non-banks. 
ECU banking is continuing to expand strongly at a time when the overall market, and all 
other major currency sectors, are 
contracting. Furthermore, whereas in the past the growth 
of ECU banking business 
was dominated by a demand for ECU 
credit, since 1989 there has been a tendency for 
ECU deposits to grow faster than ECU 
lending. This tendency was partly related to the 
accumulation of ECU reserves by central banks; as a result, the banking 
system has gradually reduced its net asset position and 
has become a 
net borrower of ECUs 
as from 1991. The strong expansion of ECU markets appears 
to have 
been related to continued market perception 
of the ECU's merits as a vehicle 
to hedge against exchange 
and interest rate 
risks. In addition, the Intergovernmental Conference 
on EMU and the prospective role of 
the ECU in the Third Stage appear 
to have stimulated the 
financial use of 
the private 
TABLE 8: ECU FINANCIAL MARKETS 
a) Source: BIS International Bonds Domestic Bonds 
Treasury Bills Euro-commercial paper 
and notes Bank Assets - interbank - other Bank Liabilities - interbank - other Memorandum Item: Central Banks' holdings of private ECUs a) There is an overlap, in particular between the securities and banking markets, owing to the role of banks as both issuers and holders of ECU securities; thus 
the total size of the market is less than 
the sum 
of the individual markets given 
in this table. ECU billion outstanding 
Sep. 1991 72.3 39.2 7.9 9.7 175.7 (129.8) (45.9) 180.9 (143.1) (37.8) 34.1 Dec. 1989 45.9 24.4 10.3 2.9 128.2 (97.4) (30.8) 116.9 (92.4) (24.5) 17.0 (end of period) Dec. 1990 54.7 35.2 8.4 6.1 148.6 (114.3) (34.3) 149.8 (118.2) (31.6) 27.1 ECU. It should also be recalled that 
the authorities 
of some Community countries and 
supranational institutions continue 
to play an important role in the ECU financial markets. For example, 
around half of the 
outstanding stock of 
international ECU 
bonds have been issued 
by national governments 
and international institutions, 
predominantly in the Community, with the balance of the funds borrowed by the business sector. Some central 
banks also hold the 
private ECU as a reserve asset. 
At the 
end of 
September 1991 
central banks together held ECU 34 billion of such reserves. In many cases these 
assets were acquired from the proceeds 
of government borrowing in ECUs. On a number of occasions central 
banks have undertaken intervention 
in private ECUs 
in the foreign exchange 
market. Derivative financial products in ECUs have been 
launched by the London and Paris 
Futures exchanges, including an ECU long-bond future 
and a 
three-month interest 
rate future. PROSPECTS AND MONETARY POLICY ISSUES 
When conducting the second 
ex ante co-ordination exercise, which 
examined national monetary policy objectives 
for 1992, the Committee 
of Governors reviewed 
forecasts of economic and 
monetary developments 
in the Community. In judging the appropriate 
thrust of monetary 
policy, particular attention was paid to the large 
margin of 
uncertainty surrounding these 
projections and 
the assumptions underpinning 
them. Economic prospects 
Forecasts presently indicate that a 
modest upturn 
in world economic growth is in prospect in 1992, which will 
provide a stimulus 
to activity within the Community. 
In the United 
States, the hesitant recovery is expected to gain momentum 
as the year progresses. Nevertheless, growth 
for the year as a whole is likely 
to be much lower than experienced in the early stages of past upswings. The Japanese economy may 
continue to slow in the early part of 
the year, although recent cuts 
in interest rates 
and budgetary measures are 
expected to limit the cyclical downturn. Activity in the EFTA countries may pick up moderately. However, given 
the close trade integration with the Community, 
the recovery expected 
in EFTA markets 
hinges in turn on a prospective 
upturn in Community markets. World trade prices are likely to remain relatively soft in 1992, leading to only small 
increases in import prices in the Community. 
Against this slowly improving international 
background, and signs 
in many countries 
that domestic conditions 
are gradually beginning to turn 
around, an upturn in economic growth 
in the Community is expected in the course of 1992. Forecasts 
produced in the autumn indicated 
that aggregate economic activity 
in the Community may 
expand by about 2% for the year as a 
whole, a rate 
of growth which would not exert pressures 
on capacity and 
labour utilisation. More 
recent data, however, suggest that 
the outcome could be less favourable. A marked reduction 
in the divergence of annual growth 
rates in the Cornunity is likely in 1992. Growth 
in western Germany will be lower, following several years 
of extraordinary buoyancy, whereas 
in the eastern 
LBnder a sharp 
turnaround is expected. On the other 
hand, most Community countries may have 
passed the 
cyclical trough, although the 
speed and strength of the recovery remain uncertain. Some improvement 
in convergence in budgetary positions 
has been assumed far 1992 on the basis 
of government intentions, although the overall fiscal imbalance 
in the Community is likely to 
remain large. A radical fiscal tightening is planned in Greece and Italy to make 
up the ground lost in 1991 and to move budgetary positions closer to a sustainable medium-term basis. In the other countries 
with either high levels 
of debt or deficits, a relatively firm fiscal stance 
is expected by the national 
authorities, although the prospective reductions 
in budgetary deficits are 
fairly small in most cases. At the Community level, the planned consolidation in the high 
deficit countries 
may be largely offset by an increase in the budget deficits in some countries with both relatively low debt and 
deficits, where 
cyclical conditions 
remain relatively weak. 
As far as labour cost 
pressures are concerned, 
some slowdown in wage growth was expected in the ex ante exercise 
for monetary 
policy co-ordination. This 
was based on the assumption that the resistance 
of firms to meet high wage 
claims would 
stiffen in an 
environment of relatively weak demand and strong competition, as well as that incomes 
policies, where applied, 
would be strengthened. Moreover, should activity 
recover as expected, 
there may also 
be a cyclical improvement 
in productivity, which would contribute to a moderation 
of unit costs. 3.2 Monetary policy prospects In the ex ante co-ordination exercise, 
the Committee of Governors considered that the 
national monetary policy intentions for the current 
year were consistent with the objective 
of reducing inflation in the Community. This assessment, however, 
was contingent upon the assumption that price 
developments would not be threatened by a number of factors outside the control of the monetary authorities. 
In this respect, not 
only may the assumptions 
about the international environment prove 
too optimistic, but there are also 
risks in a number of countries that 
plans for fiscal consolidation 
will not 
be realised, adding 
to the overall fiscal 
pressure in the Community, 
and that 
cost pressures 
will not 
abate as 
expected. If these risks 
materialise, monetary policies 
will have to be reviewed, and, 
if necessary, revised taking due 
account of their primary objective of 
promoting price stability. 
The task of monetary 
policy co-ordination will continue to prove 
difficult, as long as significant divergences persist 
between national 
economic conditions. In the last 
two years, foreign exchange market 
expectations have led to pressures 
for a marked narrowing of interest rate differentials in the Community. 
As a result, the scope 
for setting interest rates with a view to national economic conditions has 
become rather 
restricted. If the benefits 
of exchange rate stability 
are to be preserved, a monetary response 
to shocks originating 
in one country 
- especially if that country plays an important role in shaping economic 
conditions throughout the Community - would be quickly transmitted to 
the other 
Community countries. In this situation, there is a risk that 
a monetary tightening to counteract unfavourable 
price developments in some Member 
States will conflict with the desire for lower 
interest rates 
in countries with a low, or rapidly falling, 
rate of inflation and weak economic activity. However, the resulting policy 
dilemmas between domestic 
objectives and the desire to 
maintain exchange rate 
stability cannot be resolved by monetary policies alone. 
The high degree 
of integration in the Community and the interdependence between the 
national economies imposes 
constraints on all areas 
of national macro-economic management. The 
primary objective of monetary 
policy is to promote price stability 
throughout the Community and it 
is against this objective that the 
success and effectiveness of monetary policy will be judged. As 
long as strong price 
pressures continue 
in a number of countries, there will be severe limits 
to the scope for easing the overall 
monetary conditions 
in the Community. 
The difficulties 
involved in co-ordinating monetary policies in the presence of divergent national conditions, as 
well as the 
costs associated with an unbalanced policy mix, make it of the utmost importance that plans for fiscal consolidation are 
realised and that excessive wage claims are 
contained. Progress in 
these fields is 
essential not only to achieve a marked reduction 
in inflation in 1992 but also to strengthen 
the foundations underpinning 
exchange rate stability 
in the Community and 
to prepare for entry into Stage 
Three of 
EMU. 111. THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES 
OF THE NEW MONETARY INSTITUTIONS IN 
STAGES TWO AND THREE OF ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION 
In December 1991 the Heads of State 
or of Government 
agreed on the text of a Treaty 
on European Union 
which lays the legal and 
institutional foundations for 
an advancement towards a Political Union 
and the establishment 
of Economic and Monetary Union. 
The Treaty 
was signed on 7th February 
1992 and is expected 
to be ratified 
by the Member States in 
the course of 
1992. The realisation 
of EMU in accordance with the new Treaty will 
have a significant impact 
on all aspects of 
economic management 
in the Community. Essential elements of economic union will be economic 
policy co-ordination and rules 
aimed at the avoidance of excessive budget deficits. However, the 
consequences of the realisation of EMU will be most profound in the field of monetary 
policy. Possibly soon after end-1996 
- if the necessary conditions for entering Stage 
Three of 
EMU are found 
to have been met - but at the latest on 1st January 1999, the responsibility for 
monetary policy in the participating 
Member States 
will be transferred 
from the national level to 
the European 
System of Central Banks 
(ESCB). In order to ensure that 
the groundwork 
for the unprecedented move to a single, centrally decided monetary 
policy is laid, 
a European Monetary Institute 
(EMI) will be set up at the start of 
Stage Two 
on 1st January 1994. 
The EMI, which will be liquidated on the establishment 
of the ECB, will not 
only strengthen further 
the co-ordination of national monetary policies 
but will also 
prepare the necessary 
regulatory, organisational 
and logistical framework for the 
ESCB to perform its 
tasks. The Statutes 
of these two institutions 
(which are reproduced 
in Annexes I11 and IV) closely reflect the proposals 
made by the Committee of Governors as its contribution to 
the preparatory work for the Treaty on European Union. 1. THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF CENTRAL BANKS Article 1091(4) of the new Treaty states 
that: "At the starting 
date of the 
third stage, the Council shall, acting 
with the unanimity 
of the Member States without 
a derogation, on a proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting 
the ECB, adopt 
the conversion rates 
at which 
their currencies shall 
be irrevocably fixed and at which 
irrevocably fixed 
rate the ECU shall be substituted for these 
currencies, and the ECU will 
become a currency 
in its own right. This measure shall by itself not modify the external value of the 
ECU. The Council 
shall, acting according to the same procedure, also 
take the other 
measures necessary for the 
rapid introduction of the 
ECU as the single currency 
of those Member 
Statesn. The irrevocable fixing 
of exchange rates rules out 
any possibility of participating 
countries continuing to pursue independent monetary policies. Monetary Union thus implies the loss of monetary policy autonomy at the 
level of the national central 
banks and the adoption of a single monetary 
policy which, in 
accordance with the Treaty, will 
be defined and implemented 
jointly in the framework of the 
ESCB. The ESCB will operate in accordance with the provisions 
of the Treaty 
and of 
its Statute (see Annex 111). 1.1 Objectives of 
the ESCB 
The transfer 
of national decision-making power 
over monetary 
policy underscores the necessity for a clear consensus on the objectives, tasks, and operational features 
of the System. Building 
on the firmly 
shared conviction that 
price stability 
is a precondition 
for sustainable economic growth, the principal task 
of the ESCB is stated unequivocally: 
"the primary objective of the ESCB shall 
be to maintain price stabilityn. This should not be misinterpreted as 
implying that 
monetary policy will be conducted single-mindedly, 
with no regard to the 
other objectives 
of economic policy, as the Statute also requires 
the ESCB 
"to support the general economic policies 
in the Communityn, providing this takes 
place "without prejudice to the objective 
of price stabilityn. 1.2 Organisational features 
of the 
ESCB The organisational 
structure has 
been designed 
to ensure 
an effective achievement 
of the primary objective. The ESCB will consist of a new central institution, the European 
Central Bank (ECB) and the 
national central banks, which will be governed by a common set 
of rules. For the 
System to operate efficiently and coherently, the Member States 
are obliged to ensure 
that national legislation, 
including the statutes 
of each national central 
bank, are 
compatible with the Treaty and the Statute 
of the ECB. The System will be governed 
by the decision-making bodies of the ECB, the Governing Council 
and the Executive Board. The Governing Council 
will be the supreme decision-making 
body on all matters 
relating to the ESCB's tasks and operations. 
It will comprise the President, 
Vice-President, the other 
four members of the Executive Board and the Governors of the national central 
banks. In turn the Executive Board will be entrusted with the day-to-day implementation 
of monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines and decisions laid 
down by the Governing Council. To the extent deemed 
possible and 
appropriate, the ECB shall have 
recourse to the national central 
banks to 
carry out these 
operations. This structure meets 
two essential 
requirements. On the one hand, it allows monetary 
policy decisions 
to be placed firmly in the hands 
of the central decision-making 
body. On the other hand, it 
offers the 
possibility of executing policy decisions through the national central 
banks . 1.3 Independence and 
democratic accountability of the 
System In order for 
the System 
to maintain 
price stability it is 
important that 
the decision-making authorities 
shall not 
be influenced 
by considerations which would 
conflict with this aim. 
In consequence the Statute states 
that the 
ECB, the national central 
banks and any member 
of their decision-making 
bodies shall act 
without receiving instructions from 
political authorities. 
The favourable experience 
with independent monetary authorities in a number of countries 
is particularly relevant for 
a plural 
Community society where 
competing interests 
may tend to give greater 
thought to short-term considerations and thus lead 
to pressures in favour of a monetary policy stance which would not always 
be compatible with price stability in the longer 
run. The Statute contains 
a number 
of provisions to give 
practical effect to the principle of independence. 
Firstly, it ensures that members 
of the decision-making 
bodies can exercise their 
functions under 
assured tenure. Secondly, the functional, operational and 
financial provisions guarantee the economic independence 
of the System. Finally, the 
principle of "one person, one 
vote" in the Governing Council also constitutes 
an element of independence, 
since it reflects the 
consensus that members act 
on behalf of the System 
rather than 
as representatives of the Member 
States. While independence is 
considered to be an essential prerequisite 
for the fulfilment 
of the 
System's tasks, it is also fully recognised 
in the Statute that there must 
be democratic legitimacy 
and accountability. The Statute, 
which as part of 
the Treaty on European Union will 
have to be ratified by the Member States, 
clearly defines the powers entrusted 
to the Governing Council and 
the Executive 
Board, and 
the scope of 
their responsibilities. In addition, the President, Vice-President and 
other members of 
the Executive Board are appointed 
by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the level of the 
Heads of State 
or Government on a recommendation from 
the Council 
(of Ministers of Finance and Economic Affairs 
- the ECOFIN Council) after 
consulting the European 
Parliament and the Governing 
Council. The central 
bank Governors continue to be appointed by the competent 
national authorities, 
but the 
term of office of a 
Governor of a 
national central bank shall 
be no less than five year S. Transparency is 
an important element of democratic 
accountability. In addition to regular 
reports on the operation 
of the System and 
the publication of weekly consolidated financial statements, 
the ECB will present annual reports to the 
European Council, 
the ECOFIN Council, the Commission and the 
European Parliament. Transparency is 
further enhanced by the provision that the President of the ECOFIN Council 
and a member of the 
Commission may participate, without having the 
right to vote, in meetings of the Governing 
Council. 1.4 Operational and 
functional aspects 
To ensure 
the efficient 
operation of monetary policy, 
the Statute 
provides the System 
with the powers to select and 
utilise the necessary instruments and techniques 
of monetary 
control. The relevant 
provisions have been drafted 
with due regard to the evolutionary 
nature of financial markets and 
will allow the System to 
respond flexibly to changing market conditions. To avoid any obligation for 
the System which would render it extremely difficult, 
if not impossible, to attain 
price stability, the Statute denies the ECB 
and the national central 
banks the possibility 
of providing overdrafts or other types of 
credit facilities to 
public entities. In the field of exchange rate policy, the ESCB 
has been 
entrusted with the task of holding 
and managing the official reserves of the Member 
States and of 
conducting foreign 
exchange operations. 
This task must be exercised consistently with the provisions of the 
Treaty. The ECOFIN 
Council may "conclude formal 
agreements on an exchange rate system for 
the ECU vis-a-vis non-Community currencies", 
or, in the absence 
of such a system, may "formulate general 
orientations for exchange rate 
policyn. A number of safeguards 
have been introduced 
to avoid possible conflicts 
between measures taken 
or views 
expressed by 
the ECOFIN Council and the operation of monetary 
policy by the ESCB. In particular, when concluding formal exchange rate "agreements" 
the Council must consult 
the ECB "in an endeavour to reach a consensus consistent 
with the objective of price stability', while "general orientations" for exchange rate 
policy "shall be without prejudice to the 
primary objective 
of the ESCB to maintain 
price stabilityn. The System has also 
been assigned the 
task of 
promoting the 
smooth operation 
of payment 
systems. In relation to the 
wider goal of preserving financial stability in the Community, the ESCB "shall contribute 
as necessary to the smooth conduct 
of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities relating to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the stability 
of the financial systemn. Furthermore, 
the ECB has 
been provided with an advisory role 
on any proposed 
Community or national 
legislation within its 
field of competence. 
1.5 Transitional aspects 
The ESCB 
will be established immediately 
after the date has 
been set for the 
start of 
Stage Three, 
or by mid-1998 at 
the latest. 
In the event that some Member 
States do not 
fulfil the conditions 
for moving 
to the final stage 
they will be granted a 
derogation; protocols relating to 
Denmark and 
the United Kingdom make 
similar provisions 
should a 
decision be taken by either of these countries 
not to enter the final stage 
of EMU. Participation in the ESCB of 
the national central 
banks of 
Member States 
with a derogation is 
governed by special provisions 
in the Statute. These 
provisions recognise 
that monetary policy in these Member States remains 
a national responsibility 
and, furthermore, that these central 
banks should not participate in the formulation and execution of the single monetary policy pursued 
by the ESCB. However, to ensure that co-operation 
with these central banks is maintained, particularly in view of the need to 
prepare for their 
eventual full integration into 
the System, a further decision-making body of the 
ECB will 
be created, the General Council. This Council will be composed of the President and 
Vice-President of the 
ECB, and the Governors 
of the national central banks of all the Member States, 
and will perform consultative 
and advisory functions. 
It will 
cease to exist when all Member 
States of the Community 
have entered the final stage of EMU. 2. THE EUROPEAN MONETARY INSTITUTE 
The EM1 will be instrumental in facilitating and organising the transition to the single 
monetary policy which will 
come into effect in one step at the start 
of Stage Three. 
In preparing the 
transfer of monetary policy competence to the 
future ESCB, two aspects have to 
be taken into consideration. On the one hand, the responsibility for monetary 
policy will remain with the national authorities 
of the 
individual Member 
States, until the start of Stage 
Three, and, 
on the other, at 
the latest at that 
moment the conditions 
and operating procedures required 
for the conduct of the single monetary 
policy will have to be firmly in place. For this reason a 
two-pronged strategy will be followed in the transitional 
phase: national monetary policies will be co-ordinated 
even more 
closely than in the past and, at 
the same time, a wide range of preparatory work will 
be undertaken in order to enable 
the future 
ESCB to perform its tasks. Obviously, the changes in monetary policy operations which will 
become applicable in Stage Three must not infringe on national monetary 
policy autonomy during the transitional phase. However, the need 
to reach a state of readiness on the eve of Stage Three also implies 
that preparations will have 
to be made for the necessary adaptations 
to instruments and procedures currently 
used at national levels 
. 2.1 The tasks 
of the EM1 The importance 
of guiding monetary 
developments towards the introduction of the single monetary 
policy is clearly recognised 
in the three basic 
tasks assigned to 
the EM1 (see Annex 
IV). Firstly, the EM1 is entrusted with strengthening the co-ordination of national monetary policies with a view to ensuring price stability. 
This primary task, together with certain advisory functions, implies 
the assumption of the 
role currently 
performed by the Committee of Governors, which will 
be dissolved on the establishment of the EMI. 
In addition, the EM1 will have to facilitate the use of the private 
ECU and oversee its development, 
including the smooth functioning 
of the ECU clearing system. 
Secondly, the EM1 is called upon to make the preparation required for the conduct 
of a single monetary 
policy in. Stage Three and for 
the establishment of the ESCB 
and the 
creation of a single currency. 
To this end, the EM1 will have to 
specify at the latest by the end of 
1996 the regulatory, organisation and 
logistical framework for the ESCB. This will 
include not only the 
preparation of the 
necessary monetary 
policy instruments and procedures, 
but also cover such areas 
as the harmonisation 
of rules and practices governing the 
collection, compilation 
and distribution of the 
relevant monetary and financial statistics, 
the promotion of 
efficient EC cross-border 
payments and the supervision 
of the 
technical preparation 
of ECU bank notes. Moreover, the 
EM1 may be given additional tasks 
relating to the 
preparation of Stage Three. Thirdly, the EM1 has some operational 
tasks which partly arise from the transfer of 
the functions of the 
present European 
Monetary Co-operation Fund, which will cease to exist at the start 
of Stage Two. Such tasks include 
in particular the 
issuance of official ECUs for the purpose of implementing 
the EMS Agreement. In addition, the EM1 is entitled to hold and manage foreign 
exchange reserves 
as an agent for, and at the request of, Community central 
banks. This latter function, however, is 
subject to rules to 
be adopted by the EM1 which shall ensure that 
the EMI's transactions with these reserves 
do not interfere 
with the monetary and exchange rate 
policies of 
the national authorities and are consistent with 
the objectives of the EM1 and the proper 
functioning of the ERM. 2.2 The structure of the 
EM1 The EM1 will be a Community 
body which will have its 
own legal personality. It will be governed by the Council 
of the 
EM1 which, in addition to the Governors 
of the national central banks, 
will include a President appointed 
by common accord of the Governments of the Member States at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government on a recommendation from the Committee of Governors from 
among persons 
of recognised 
standing and professional 
expertise in monetary or banking matters. 
The President 
will prepare and chair the meetings 
of the Council 
of the EMI, 
present the 
views of the 
EM1 externally and 
be responsible for the day-to-day management. A Vice-President, chosen 
from among the 
central bank governors, will perform these duties in the absence of the President. 
The EM1 will be an independent body. The Council of 
the EM1 may not seek or 
take any 
instructions from 
Community institutions or bodies 
or Governments of Member States. However, since the responsibility 
for monetary policy remains with the national authorities, it is also 
recognised that 
the Governors 
are the representatives 
of their 
institutions. Nevertheless, with 
respect to their 
activities on the Council 
of the EMI, they will act according 
to their 
own responsibilities. During Stage Two, each Member State, 
as appropriate, will have 
to' start the process leading to the 
independence of its central bank, 
completing it at 
the latest by the time of 
the establishment of the 
ESCB. The EM1 will have its own financial 
resources to cover its administrative expenditure. These resources 
will be paid up at the establishment of the 
EM1 in the form of contributions shared 
by the Community central 
banks in accordance with a key reflecting in equal proportions their countries' 
GDP and population. The existence of the EM1 will end with the establishment of the ECB and 
it will go 
into liquidation 
in accordance with the rules 
laid down in the EM1 Statute. 2.3 Preparatory work in the monetary field 
for the move to 
Stages Two and Three 
of EMU The Treaty 
on European Union sets a very 
ambitious agenda for 
the institutional, organisation 
and legal measures 
which at the latest 
will have to 
be specified 
by the end of 
1996, i.e. within less than five 
years. While the preparatory measures for 
the conduct of a single 
monetary policy are explicitly assigned 
to the 
EMI, the complexity of the issues 
involved and the time needed to resolve 
them makes 
it prudent not to await 
the establishment of 
the EM1 on 1st January 1994 but rather to 
commence preparatory work in some of 
the relevant areas as soon as 
possible. For this reason, the Committee 
of Governors 
has not only embarked on the work required for setting 
up the EMI, but has also begun to take the 
first preparatory steps 
for laying the 
foundation for 
the conduct of the single 
monetary policy. PART B THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCm OF THE COMTTEE OF GOVERNORS 
I. THE CREATION 
AND THE EVOLVING ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS The Committee of Governors was created in 1964 by the Council 
Decision (64/300/EEC) of 8th May 1964 
on co-operation between the 
Central Banks of the Member States of the European 
Economic Community. The initial tasks of the Committee 
were: "to hold consultations concerning the general 
principles and the 
broad lines of policy of the Central Banks, in particular as regards credit and money and foreign exchange 
markets, and to 
exchange information 
at regular intervals about the most important measures that fall 
within the competence of the Central Banks, and to examine these While these original 
tasks reflected the modest ambitions 
prevailing at 
that time 
with respect to monetary co-operation within 
the Community, the Committee's role was 
increased at 
the end of 
the 1960s as 
monetary integration 
progressed and plans 
to create an economic and monetary union were first launched. 1 In 1971, the Community Central Banks 
were invited to co-ordinate their policies in monetary and credit matters within the Committee 
of ~overnors.' The Committee also 
became a vehicle for central 
bank co-operation in the balance-of-payments and exchange rate 
fields. In 1970, the Community central 
banks set 
up the system of short-term monetary a multilateral credit 
system giving 
access to short-term funds in case of a temporary balance-of-payments deficit 
due to unforeseen difficulties or 
to conjunctural divergences. Another 
step on the road towards monetary integration 
was made in 1972 with 
the establishment of the 1 See the report to the Council and the Commission 
on the realisation by stages of economic and monetary 
union in the Community (Werner Report), dated 8th October 1970. 
2 See Council Decision 
(71/142/EEC) of 22nd March 1971 
on the strengthening of co-operation between the 
central banks of the Member 
States of the European Economic Community. 
3 See 
the Agreement of 9th February 1970 setting up a system 
of short-term monetary support among 
the central banks of the Member 
States of the European 
Economic Community. 
system for the narrowing of the margins of fluctuation between 
the currencies of the 
Member States 
(the so-called :snaken). 4 At the end of the 1970s the Committee's 
tasks were extended further when the process of economic 
and monetary integration 
was revived. In March 1979, the European Monetary System (EMS) 
was set up to supersede 
the "snaken. The operational procedures were laid down in the central bank Agreement of 13th March 
1979,~ which since then has 
served as the institutional framework for central 
bank co-operation. In 1986, when 
the EC Treaty was revised in the context of the Single European 
Act, advisory status with respect to institutional 
changes in the monetary area 
was conferred upon the Committee 
of Governors (Article 
102 A). Additional advisory tasks 
were assigned to the 
Committee in 1988 with 
reference to 
the abolition of restrictions on capital movements under Article 
67 of the Treaty. Most recently, 
the Committee's responsibilities were increased in the context of Stage One 
of EMU. The mandate of the Committee 
was revised by the Council 
in March 1990 
and is reproduced 
in Annex I. The activities of the Committee under this 
revised mandate were described in Chapter I. 4 Agreement of 10th April 1972 between the central 
banks of the 
Member States of the Community 
on the narrowing of the margins of fluctuation between Community currencies. 5 Agreement of 13th March 
1979 between 
the central banks 
of the Member 
States of the European 
Economic Community laying 
down the operating 
procedures for the European 
Monetary System. The growing role 
of the Committee of 
Governors and 
the assignment of new tasks have 
necessitated changes 
in the Committee's organisational structure from time to 
time. The present structure was set up at the 
start of Stage One of 
EMU in July 1990 (see Chart 10). The Committee 
of Governors is composed of the Governors 
of the 
central banks of 
the Member 
States of the 
Community and the Director 
General of the 
Luxembourg Monetary Institute. A 
member of the 
Commission is regularly invited to the meetings of the Committee. 
In accordance with the mandate, "the members of the Committee, who are the representatives 
of their institutions, 
shall act, with 
respect to their activities on the Committee, according to 
their own responsibilities and having due 
regard to Community objectives". 
The Committee of Governors meets 
at regular intervals, normally 
ten times a year. 
The proceedings of the meetings are confidential; 
however, the Committee may 
authorise its Chairman to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public. In the performance of 
its duties, 
the Committee 
enjoys autonomy. It adopts its own 
rules of procedure 
and, unlike other Committees created under Community 
charter, has its 
own organisational structure. The Chairman is 
elected by the Committee from among its 
members. The present Chairman is 
Dr. E. Hoffmeyer, Governor 
of Danmarks Nationalbank; he succeeded Herr K.O. Pbhl, who relinquished the chairmanship when resigning as President of 
the Deutsche Bundesbank at 
the end of July 1991. The Committee 
of Governors 
is assisted 
by the Committee 
of Alternates, three sub-committees, 
the Secretariat 
and the Economic Unit. 
In addition, for 
specialised tasks, the Committee at times establishes ad hoc working groups. The Chairmen 
of the sub-committees and 
working groups 
are appointed by the Committee of 
Governors, which also appoints its 
Secretary General and the other professional members 
of the Secretariat 
and Economic Unit. The Commission is 
in general represented 
on the various sub-committees and 
ad hoc working groups. The Committee of Alternates 
is composed of senior 
representatives of Community central 
banks who have been 
appointed by the Governors as 
their alternates in the Committee of Governors. The main task of the Committee of Alternates is to 
prepare the 
meetings of 
the Committee of CHART 10: ORGANISATION CHART FOR THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS 
OF THE EEC MEMBER STATES (APRIL 1992) 
COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS Chairman: E. Hoffmeyer (1) SECRETARIAT & ECONOMIC UNIT Secretary General : COMMITTEE OF ALTERNATES l Chairman: FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
POLICY SUB-COMMI TTEE Chainnan: F. Saccmnni (2) MONETARY POLICY SUB-COMMI TTEE Chainnan: A. Borges (3) I Chairman: I I Chairman: I BANKING SUPERVISORY 
SUB-COMMITTEE I I AD HOC WORKING GROUP 
1 ON EC PAYMENT SYSTEMS 
1 Replaced K.O. Pohl with effect from 1st Au st 1991. Replaced H. Dalgaard with effect 
fm 1st %ember 1991. 1:) Replaced R. Raymond with effect fm 1st September 1991. B. @inn T . Padoa-Sch ioppa L --------------- 1 Governors on the basis 
of work carried out 
by the sub-committees, 
the Secretariat and the 
Economic Unit. 
The Committee 
of Alternates normally 
meets on the eve of the Committee 
of Governors' meetings. 
The Commission is, as a general rule, invited to 
send a senior official 
as a representative to the meetings of the Alternates. 
The Foreinn Exchange Policy 
Sub-Committee is 
composed of central bank officials who are involvea in the formulation and implementation 
of national foreign exchange policies. The Sub-Committee 
prepares the 
Governors' discussions on all foreign 
exchange issues. 
This preparatory work includes the monthly 
monitoring of exchange rate and 
monetary developments, the production of regular reports on the functioning of 
the EMS and 
developments in the use 
of the private 
ECU, as well 
as ad hoc studies on special topics. The Sub-Committee 
also arranges for the 
regular exchange of information 
with non-Community central 
banks in the framework 
of the "concertation proceduren. This procedure provides 
for the daily 
exchange of data on exchange market developments, intervention 
and other 
official foreign exchange transactions, 
and for monthly meetings 
of the "Concertation Group", which is composed of the 
members of the Sub-Committee and of the Heads of the Foreign Departments of the central 
banks of the United States, Canada, 
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, 
Austria and Switzerland. The Monetary Policy Sub-Committee is 
composed of central bank officials who are involved in the formulation and implementation 
of monetary policies 
in their national institutions. The duties of 
the Sub-Committee include the 
preparation of the regular examinations 
of monetary policy intentions and their 
implementation as well as the analysis of issues relating 
to the conduct of monetary policies 
in the various stages of EMU. In this context, for instance, 
it holds consultations 
on changes in the definition 
of monetary and credit aggregates 
in the Community and reviews regularly 
developments in the field of monetary policy instruments. 
The Sub-Committee also 
prepares the Governors' annual 
assessments of the Member States' budgetary policies 
and debt 
management. The Bankinn Supervisory Sub-Committee is composed of a senior representative of each Community 
central bank. In the cases where EEC central 
banks do not 
have legal responsibility 
for banking supervision, a senior representative of the respective banking supervisory authority 
- namely, the Belgian 
Banking and Finance Commission, the Danish 
Finanstilsynet and 
the German Bundesaufsichtsamt fur das Kreditwesen 
- also participates in the meetings. The principal task 
of the Sub-Committee 
is to hold 
regular consultations on matters of common interest 
relating to the policies 
and practices of banking 
supervision in the Member States, 
particularly where there is 
a Community-wide dimension. In order to ensure 
effective co-ordination with other supervisory bodies and to avoid unnecessary 
duplication in addressing issues of common interest, the Committee 
liaises with the Basle 
Committee on Banking Supervision, the Banking Advisory 
Committee, and the 
Financial Institutions and Company 
Law Directorate of the Commission of the European 
Communities. For the execution 
of special tasks, the Committee of Governors has, at times, created 
ad hoc working groups. At present, issues of 
direct concern for central 
banks in the field of payment systems 
are being studied 
by such a special working 
group. The Secretariat 
of the Committee of 
Governors provides all secretarial services to the 
Committee itself, the Committee of Alternates and the 
sub-committees, as well 
as to the Board 
of Governors of the European Monetary Co-operation 
Fund (EMCF). In July 1990, an Economic Unit was added to the 
existing Secretariat. The principal task of 
the Economic Unit is to provide 
analytical support 
to the 
work of the Committee 
of Governors. The Secretariat and 
the Economic Unit, which are both headed 
by the Secretary 
General of the Committee, are 
independent in their work from 
any other national 
or international 
institution or government. 
The staff is 
composed of nationals from 
the Member States 
who are in most cases 
seconded from national central 
banks or international institutions. 
The number 
of staff is currently 
nineteen. The Secretariat 
is based within the 
Bank for International 
Settlements, which also provides technical 
and logistical 
support to the Committee of Governors. The expenses incurred 
by the Committee of 
Governors are shared out among 
the central 
banks in proportion to their quotas in the short-term monetary 
support facility. 
CURRENCIES ECU BEF DKK DEM GRD ESP FRF IEP 
ITL NLG PTE GBP USD JPY Belgium Denmark Germany Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom United States of America Japan European Currency Unit 
BelgianlLuxembourg franc Danish krone Deutsche Mark 
Greek drachma 
Spanish peseta French franc Irish pound Italian lira Dutch guilder Portuguese escudo Pound sterling 
US dollar Japanese yen OTHER ABBREVIATIONS BIS Bank for International Settlements 
EEC European Economic Community 
(12 Member States) 
ERM Exchange Rate Mechanism (all EEC Member 
States participate except 
Greece and Portugal) Narrow ERM Narrow band of the ERM (all EEC Member 
States participate except Greece, Spain, 
Portugal and the 
United Kingdom) GDP Gross Domestic 
Product GNP Gross National Product 
OECD Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development 1 Figures for 
the EEC, the ERM, and the ERM narrow band are weighted averages. 2 In accordance with Community practice, countries 
are listed in the Report using 
the alphabetical order of the national languages, as shown above. ANNEXES ANNEX I : Revised mandate of the Committee of Governors ANNEX 11 : Harmonisation of broad monetary aggregates ANNEX 111 : The Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank ANNEX IV : The Statute of the European Monetary Institute Annex I COUNCIL DECISION 
of 12th March 1990 amendin~ Council Decision 
6413001EEC on co-operation between the 
central banks of the Member States 
of the European Economic 
Community THE COUNCIL 
OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing 
the European Economic Community, and in particular to Article 105(1) and to the 
first indent 
of Article 145 thereof, Having regard to the 
recommendation from 
the Commission, Having regard to the 
opinion of the 
European parliamentL, 2Having regard to the 
opinion of the Economic 
and Social Committee , Whereas the European Council, at its meeting 
in Madrid on 26th and 27th June 1989, decided that 
the first stage 
of the 
realisation of economic and monetary union should begin on 1st 
July 1990; Whereas Article 
102a of the Treaty together 
with the realisation of the first stage of the economic and monetary union call for 
an increased degree of convergence in economic performance towards 
non-inflationary growth and of economic and social cohesion 
between the Member States; Whereas greater convergence 
should be promoted with a view to achieving domestic 
price stability, which is at the same time 
a necessary condition for 
stable exchange rates, in accordance with the requirements of the European Monetary System; Whereas the realisation of the first stage of economic and monetary union will 
focus on completing the internal market 
and in particular on removing all 
obstacles to financial integration, on strengthening the process of co-ordination of monetary policies, on 
intensifying co-operation between central banks on other matters 
falling within their competence 
and whereas, in this connection, consideration should be given to extending the 
scope of the central banks' autonomy; Whereas arrangements 
for the formulation of monetary policy within the framework 
of an economic and monetary union 
should provide 
for adequate autonomy 
for the institutions and for commitment to 
price stability, which 
is essential 
to the success of that union; Whereas, in view of the 
objective of the progressive realisation of economic and monetary union, the tasks should 
be extended and the tasks 
1 Official Journal 
of the European Communities 
No. C68, 19.3.1990. 2 Official Journal 
of the European Communities 
No. C56, 7.3.1990, p.47. Annex I and role 
of the Committee 
of Governors 
of the Central Banks of the Member States of the European 
Economic Community should 
be reinforced; 3 Whereas Decision 
6413001EEC should be amended in consequence, HAS DECIDED AS 
FOLLOWS: Sole Article Decision 64/300/EEC is amended as follows: 1. Article 2 is replaced by the following: "Article 2 The Committee 
shall be composed of the 
Governors of the Central Banks of the 
Member States and 
the Director-General of the Luxembourg 
Monetary Institute. If they are unable to attend, 
they may nominate another 
representative of 
their institution. 
The Commission shall, 
as a 
general rule, 
be invited to send one 
of its members 
as a representative 
to the 
meetings of the Committee. 
The Committee may, furthermore, if it considers it necessary, 
invite qualified 
persons to attend and in particular the chairman 
of the monetary committee." 2. The following 
Article is inserted: "Article 2a The chairman 
of the Committee shall be invited to participate in 
the meetings of the 
Council of Ministers 
whenever it deals with-issues involving the tasks of the Committee of Governors." 
3. Article 3 is replaced by the following: 
"Article 3 The tasks 
of the Committee shall 
be: (1) to hold consultations concerning 
the general principles and the broad lines of monetary policy, in particular as regards 
credit, the money and foreign 
exchange markets as 
well as issues falling within the competence of the central banks and affecting 
the stability of financial 
institutions and 
markets; (2) to exchange information 
regularly about the most important measures that fall within 
the competence of 
the central banks, 
and to 
examine those measures. The 
Committee shall normally 
be consulted before the 
national authorities 
take decisions on the course of monetary 
policy, such as the setting 
of annual money supply and credit targets; 
(3) to promote the 
co-ordination of the 
monetary policies 
of the Member States 
with the aim of achieving price stability as a 
necessary condition for 
the proper functioning of 
the European 
Monetary System 
and the realisation 
of its objective 
of monetary stability; 3 Official Journal 
of the 
European Communities No. 77, 21.5.1964, p.1206/64. Annex I (4) to formulate opinions 
on the overall orientation 
of monetary and exchange rate 
policy as well as on the respective measures 
introduced in individual Member States; (5) to express opinions 
to individual governments and 
the Council of Ministers on policies which might affect the internal 
and external monetary 
situation in the Community 
and, in particular, the functioning 
of the 
European Monetary System. In carrying out its tasks, the Committee shall 
keep under review 
the monetary situation 
and pr6qyscts both inside and outside the Community. The Committee shall prepare an annual report on its activities and on the monetary 
and financial conditions 
in the Community, which 
will be transmitted to the 
European Parliament, 
the Council of Ministers, and the European Council. The President of the Committee may 
be invited to appear before the European Parliament on 
this occasion and also before the 
competent committee 
of the European Parliament 
where the circumstances 
so justify. The Committee 
may authorise its chairman 
to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public." 4. The following Article is 
inserted: "Article 3a The members 
of the Committee, who are the representatives of their institutions, shall act, with respect to their 
activities on the Committee, according to their 
own responsibilities and having due 
regard to Community objectives." 5. Article 5 is replaced by the following: "Article 5 The Committee shall 
adopt its own rules of procedure. It may set up sub-committees and provide its 
own secretariat 
and research services." 
Done at Brussels, 12th March 1990. For the Council 
The President 
A. REYNOLDS Annex I1 Over the last eighteen months, 
Community. central banks and the Economic Unit have worked 
together to improve the consistency of 
national definitions of money stocks. The project has initially 
concentrated on 
broad money aggregates, which 
are used as intermediate monetary 
targets or as a key monetary indicator in most Community countries. 
Narrow monetary aggregates may 
be examined more closely at a later 
stage; however, 
a preliminary survey 
has indicated that their definitions 
are already quite 
similar across Community countries. 
The starting point 
for the harmonisation project was to 
select the national measures 
of broad money which seemed to be closest in statistical content. Even though 
their names vary the 
definitions proved to be already reasonably 
similar in most 
cases.' In addition to assets 
included in narrow aggregates (typically those 
used as an immediate means of payment), 
broad aggregates generally incorporate other 
"liquid assets", which are close 
substitutes for a means of payment either because 
they have a short 
maturity or because 
they can be easily transformed 
into a means of payment at little cost 
or risk of loss. Certain discrepancies were identified, however, 
in the asset composition and 
in other aspects, such as 
currency denomination, of the 
national definitions. Nevertheless, 
given the differences in financial structure and behaviour across Community countries, it was 
felt that full 
harmonisation, in the sense of a mechanical 
elimination of all statistical discrepancies, would have 
been inappropriate. 
Rather, the characteristics 
of assets which are, 
or could be, included 
in national definitions 
had to be examined carefully 
on a case-by-case basis in order to assess their 
relevance in practice. Furthermore, due 
regard had 
to be paid to the need 
to preserve the economic 
properties which render monetary 
aggregates useful in the conduct of monetary policy. Among these 
properties, priority was given to the stability of the link between money and 
the final 
goals. The 
importance of controllability 
was less clear, since the process of European financial integration, 
together with the objective of 
exchange rate 
stability, is gradually weakening the scope to control monetary growth at 
the national level. The economic properties 
of the broad 
aggregates chosen as a starting point 
for the harmonisation 
exercise served as benchmarks when assessing alternative 
statistical definitions. Econometric analysis showed that for most 
countries the 
selected definitions have exhibited a fairly 
stable and predictable link 
with nominal income and interest rates over 
the 1980s. Following economic and statistical analysis of 
possible alternatives for national aggregates, 
recommendations for changes 
in definition have been 
put forward. In some cases, they are being embodied 
in official national definitions; 
in others, for 
the time 
being, they will only be implemented for the internal purposes of the 
Committee of Governors, as further analysis 
may be needed. Once 
the proposed changes have been implemented, 
the definitions of 
broad money will 
be sufficiently similar across the Community 
- in terms of asset composition, 
currency denomination and sectoral definition - to facilitate both 
the direct 1 Aggregates selected were M3 in Belgium, Germany, France, 
the Netherlands, Greece and Ireland, 
M2 in Italy, Denmark and Luxembourg, 
M4 in the United Kingdom, ALP 
in Spain, and L- in Portugal. Annex I1 comparison of developments in national money 
stocks and the aggregation of the latter into monetary 
indicators for the area as 
a whole. After harmonisation, 
the aggregates under review 
display the following characteristics: (a) Asset composition 
The aggregates include 
the following monetary 
assets: notes, coins and sight deposits, as well as 
savings deposits, deposits 
at notice and fixed-time deposits, 
except those above certain maturity thresholds in 
a few countries. This latter difference is relatively 
minor in practice since, in the countries where thresholds are not used, assets are 
mostly short-term, and, where 
thresholds are used, 
the excluded 
assets have 
obvious non-monetary features, 
such as a 
very long maturity or 
a high cost of conversion into 
a liquid 
asset. Criteria based on the notions 
of liquidity and 
substitutability with other assets were applied to assess the desirability of including such 
assets as negotiable certificates, 
repurchase agreements 
between banks and 
non-banks (irrespective 
of the asset used as 
collateral), short-term bank bonds, and non-negotiable certificates. (b) Currency 
denomination and cross-border holdings 
To comply with the current practice of 
most Community countries, 
monetary aggregates 
should include 
assets, held by domestic residents, 
independently of whether they 
are denominated in domestic or foreign currency. Data on holdings of those assets are readily available 
when they are the liabilities 
of domestically-located intermediaries. 
However, given 
the increasing importance 
of cross-border 
holdings by non-financial residents, "extended national measures"which include these holdings will 
be used as auxiliary indicators 
according to the availability 
of statistical information. (C) Sectoral definition As long as 
financial structures and behaviour differ, the sectoral definition of money 
"issuers" and "holders" across the Community should take country-specific 
features into account. As a result, no common 
definition of these sectors 
can be put forward. However, as 
a general principle, all monetary liabilities of 
the (domestically-located) financial 
institutions which operate as banks should be included. The resulting aggregate is taken as 
the principal monetary indicator and, 
at present, is 
termed "M3H"for the internal purposes of the 
Committee of Governors. A 
wider concept, called internally 
"M4Hn, is also 
monitored. In addition to the instruments included in M3H, this broader 
concept consists 
of those 
liabilities of 
the non-financial sector which are highly 
substitutable for the components of 
M3H (mainly Government 
short-term paper and corporate 
commercial paper). Annex I11 TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNION AS SIGNED ON 7TH FEBRUARY 
1992 PROTOCOL ON THE 
STATUTE OF 
THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF 
CENTRAL BANKS AND OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL 
BANK THE HIGH CONTRACTING 
PARTIES, DESIRING to lay down the Statute of the European System 
of Central Banks and of the European Central 
Bank provided 
for in Article 4a of the Treaty establishing the European Community, HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, which 
shall be annexed to the Treaty establishing the European Community: 
CHAPTER I - CONSTITUTION OF THE 
ESCB ARTICLE 1 - The European System of Central Banks 
1.1 The European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the European Central Bank (ECB) shall be established in accordance with Article 4a 
of this Treaty; they shall perform 
their tasks and carry on their activities in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty 
and of this Statute. 1.2 In accordance with Article 106(1) of this Treaty, the ESCB shall be composed of the ECB and of the central 
banks of the 
Member States ("national central banks"). The 
Institut monetaire luxembourgeois will 
be the central bank of Luxembourg. CHAPTER I1 - OBJECTIVES AND TASKS OF 
THE ESCB ARTICLE 2 - Objectives In accordance with Article 105(1) of this Treaty, the primary objective of the ESCB shall 
be to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to the objective of price stability, it shall support the general economic policies in the Community with a 
view to contributing to the achievement 
of the objectives of the Community as laid down in Article 2 of this Treaty. 
The ESCB 
shall act 
in accordance with the principle of an open market economy with free competition, favouring 
an efficient allocation of resources, and in compliance with the principles 
set out in Article 3a of this Treaty. 
ARTICLE 3 - Tasks 3.1 In accordance with Article 
105(2) of this Treaty, the basic tasks to be carried out 
through the ESCB shall be: - to define 
and implement the monetary policy 
of the Community; - to conduct foreign 
exchange operations consistent 
with the provisions of Article 109 of this Treaty; - to hold and manage the official foreign reserves 
of the Member States; - to promote the smooth operation 
of payment systems. 
Annex I11 3.2 In accordance with Article 105(3) of this Treaty, the 
third indent of Article 3.1 shall be without prejudice to the holding 
and management by the governments 
of Member States 
of foreign exchange working 
balances. 3.3 In accordance with Article 105(5) of this Treaty, the 
ESCB shall contribute 
to the smooth conduct 
of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities relating to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the 
stability of 
the financial system. ARTICLE 4 - Advisory functions 
In accordance with Article 105(4) of this Treaty: 
a) the ECB shall 
be consulted: - on any proposed Community act in its fields 
of competence; - by national authorities regarding any draft legislative 
provision in its fields 
of competence, but within the limits and under the conditions set 
out by the Council in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42; b) the ECB may submit opinions 
to the appropriate Community institutions or bodies or to national authorities on matters 
in its fields 
of competence. ARTICLE 5 - Collection of statistical information 5.1 In order to 
undertake the tasks of the 
ESCB, the ECB, assisted by the national central banks, 
shall collect the 
necessary statistical 
information either 
from the competent 
national authorities 
or directly from 
economic agents. For these 
purposes it shall co-operate with the Community institutions or bodies and 
with the competent authorities 
of the 
Member States or third 
countries and with international organisations. 
5.2 The national central banks shall 
carry out, to 
the extent possible, the tasks 
described in Article 5.1. 5.3 The ECB 
shall contribute 
to the 
harmonisation, where necessary, of the rules 
and practices governing 
the collection, compilation 
and distribution of statistics 
in the areas within its fields 
of competence. 5.4 The Council, in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
Article 42, shall define 
the natural and legal persons subject to reporting requirements, the confidentiality regime and the 
appropriate provisions for enforcement. ARTICLE 6 - International co-operation 
6.1 In the field 
of international co-operation involving the 
tasks entrusted to the ESCB, the 
ECB shall 
decide how the ESCB shall 
be represented. 6.2 The ECB and, 
subject to its approval, the national central 
banks may participate in international monetary institutions. 
6.3 Articles 6.1 and 6.2 shall be without prejudice 
to Article 109(4) of this Treaty. Annex I11 CHAPTER I11 - ORGANISATION OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 7 - Independence In accordance with Article 107 of this 
Treaty, when exercising the powers 
and carrying out 
the tasks and 
duties conferred 
upon them by this Treaty 
and this Statute, neither the ECB 
nor a national central bank, 
nor any member 
of their decision-making bodies shall seek or take 
instructions from Community institutions or 
bodies, from any government 
of a Member State 
or from any other 
body. The Community institutions and bodies and 
the governments 
of the 
Member States undertake 
to respect this principle and not to 
seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the 
ECB or of 
the national central 
banks in the performance of their tasks. 
ARTICLE 8 - General principle 
The ESCB shall 
be governed by the decision-making bodies of the ECB . ARTICLE 9 - The European Central Bank 
9.1 The ECB which, 
in accordance with Article 106(2) of this 
Treaty, shall have legal 
personality, shall enjoy 
in each of 
the Member States the most 
extensive legal capacity accorded to legal 
persons under 
its law; it may, in 
particular, acquire or 
dispose of movable and immovable 
property and may 
be a party to legal proceedings. 
9.2 The ECB shall ensure 
that the 
tasks conferred upon 
the ESCB 
under Article 
105(2), (3) and (5) of this Treaty 
are implemented either by its own activities 
pursuant to this 
Statute or 
through the national central banks pursuant 
to Articles 12.1 
and 14. 9.3 In accordance with Article 106(3) of this 
Treaty, the decision-making bodies of 
the ECB 
shall be the Governing 
Council and the 
Executive Board. ARTICLE 10 - The Governing Council 
10.1 In accordance with 
Article 109a(l) of this 
Treaty, the Governing Council shall 
comprise the members of 
the Executive Board of the ECB and the Governors of the national central banks. 10.2 Subject to 
Article 10.3, only 
members of the 
Governing Council 
present in person shall have 
the right to 
vote. By way of derogation from 
this rule, the Rules 
of Procedure referred 
to in Article 12.3 
may lay down that members of the Governing 
Council may cast their 
vote by means of teleconferencing. These rules 
shall also provide that a 
member of the Governing Council 
who is prevented from voting for a prolonged 
period may appoint an alternate as a member 
of the Governing Council. Subject to 
Articles 10.3 and 11.3, each member 
of the 
Governing Council shall have one 
vote. Save as otherwise provided 
for in this Statute, the Governing Council 
shall act by a simple majority. 
In the event 
of a 
tie, the President 
shall have the casting vote. In order for 
the Governing Council to vote, there shall 
be a quorum of two-thirds 
of the members. If the quorum is not 
met, the President may convene an extraordinary meeting at which decisions may 
be taken without 
regard to the quorum. 
Annex I11 10.3 For any 
decisions to be taken under Articles 
28, 29, 30, 32, 33 and 51, the votes 
in the Governing Council shall be weighted according to 
the national central 
banks' shares in the subscribed 
capital of the ECB. The weights 
of the votes 
of the members of 
the Executive 
Board shall be zero. A decision requiring a qualified 
majority shall 
be adopted if the votes cast in favour represent at least two-thirds of the subscribed capital of the ECB 
and represent at least half 
of the shareholders. If a Governor is unable to 
be present, he may nominate an alternate to cast his weighted vote. 10.4 The proceedings 
of the meetings 
shall be 
confidential. The Governing Council may decide 
to make the outcome of its deliberations 
public. 10.5 The Governing 
Council shall meet at least ten times a year. 
ARTICLE 11 - The Executive Board 11.1 In accordance with Article 109a(2)(a) of this 
Treaty, the Executive Board shall comprise 
the President, the Vice-President 
and four other members. The members 
shall perform their 
duties on a full-time basis. No 
member shall engage 
in any occupation, whether gainful 
or not, unless exemption is 
exceptionally granted 
by the Governing Council. 11.2 In accordance with Article 109a(2)(b) of this 
Treaty, the President, the Vice-President 
and the 
other Members of the 
Executive Board shall be appointed from 
among persons of recognised standing and 
professional experience in monetary or banking matters by common accord of the governments of the 
Member States at the level of the 
Heads of 
State or of Government, on a recommendation from the Council after 
it has consulted the European Parliament and 
the Governing 
Council. Their term 
of office shall be eight years and shall not 
be renewable. Only nationals of Member States may be members of the Executive 
Board. 11.3 The terms and conditions 
of employment of 
the members 
of the Executive Board, 
in particular their 
salaries, pensions and other social security benefits 
shall be the subject of contracts with the ECB and 
shall be fixed by the Governing Council on a proposal 
from the Committee 
comprising three members appointed 
by the Governing Council 
and three 
members appointed 
by the Council. The members of the 
Executive Board shall not have 
the right to 
vote on matters referred 
to in this paragraph. 11.4 If a member of the Executive Board 
no longer fulfils 
the conditions required for the performance of 
his duties 
or if he has been guilty of serious 
misconduct, the Court of Justice may, on 
application by the Governing Council 
or the Executive 
Board, compulsorily retire 
him. 11.5 Each member 
of the Executive 
Board present in person shall have the right to vote and shall have, for 
that purpose, one vote. 
Save as 
otherwise provided, the 
Executive Board shall act 
by a simple 
majority of the votes cast. In the event of a 
tie, the President shall have 
the casting 
vote. The voting 
arrangements shall 
be specified in the Rules of Procedure 
referred to 
in Article 12.3. 11.6 The Executive 
Board shall be 
responsible for the current 
business of the ECB. Annex I11 11.7 Any vacancy 
on the Executive Board shall be 
filled by the appointment of a 
new member in accordance with Article 11.2. ARTICLE 12 - Responsibilities of the decision-making bodies 12.1 The Governing Council 
shall adopt the 
guidelines and take 
the decisions necessary to 
ensure the performance 
of the tasks entrusted to 
the ESCB under this Treaty 
and this 
Statute. The Governing Council 
shall formulate the monetary 
policy of the Community including, as appropriate, decisions relating to intermediate monetary objectives, 
key interest rates and the supply of reserves 
in the ESCB, and shall establish the 
necessary guidelines for their implementation. The Executive 
Board shall implement 
monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines and decisions laid 
down by the Governing 
Council. In doing so 
the Executive 
Board shall give the necessary 
instructions to national 
central banks. In addition the Executive Board may have certain 
powers delegated 
to it 
where the Governing Council so 
decides. To the 
extent deemed possible 
and appropriate and without prejudice to the provisions of 
this Article, the ECB shall 
have recourse 
to the national central 
banks to carry out operations which form 
part of 
the tasks of the ESCB. 12.2 The Executive 
Board shall have responsibility for 
the preparation of meetings of 
the Governing 
Council. 12.3 The Governing 
Council shall 
adopt Rules 
of Procedure which 
determine the internal organisation 
of the ECB and its decision-making 
bodies. 12.4 The Governing 
Council shall exercise the 
advisory functions referred to in Article 4. 12.5 The Governing Council 
shall take 
the decisions 
referred to in Article 6. ARTICLE 13 - The President 
13.1 The President 
or, in his absence, the Vice-President shall chair the Governing Council and 
the Executive Board of the ECB. 13.2 Without prejudice to Article 39, the President or his nominee 
shall represent 
the ECB externally. 
ARTICLE 14 - National central 
banks 14.1 In accordance with 
Article 108 of this 
Treaty, each Member 
State shall ensure, 
at the latest at the date of the establishment 
of the ESCB, that its national legislation, 
including the statutes of 
its national 
central bank, is compatible with 
this Treaty 
and this Statute. 
14.2 The statutes of the 
national central 
banks shall, in particular, provide that 
the term of office of a 
Governor of a 
national central bank shall 
be no less than 
5 years. A Governor may be relieved from office only if he 
no longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of 
his duties or 
if he has been 
guilty of serious misconduct. 
A decision to 
this effect 
may be referred to the Court 
of Justice by the Governor 
concerned or the Governing 
Council on grounds of infringement of this 
Treaty or of any 
rule of law relating to , its application. Such proceedings shall 
be instituted within two months 
of the Annex I11 publication of the decision 
or of its notification to the plaintiff or, in the absence thereof, 
of the day on which it came to 
the knowledge 
of the latter, as 
the case may be. 14.3 The national central banks are an integral part of the ESCB and 
shall act in accordance with the guidelines 
and instructions of the ECB. The Governing Council 
shall take 
the necessary steps to ensure compliance 
with the guidelines and 
instructions of the ECB, and shall require 
that any necessary information 
be given to it. 14.4 National central 
banks may perform functions other 
than those specified in this Statute unless 
the Governing Council 
finds, by a majority of two' thirds 
of the votes cast, that these interfere 
with the objectives 
and tasks of the 
ESCB. Such functions shall be performed 
on the responsibility and liability of national central 
banks and 
shall not be regarded as being part of the 
functions of the ESCB. ARTICLE 15 - Reporting commitments 
15.1 The ECB shall draw up and publish reports 
on the activities 
of the ESCB at least quarterly. 
15.2 A consolidated financial statement of the ESCB 
shall be published each week. 15.3 In accordance with Article 109b(3) of this Treaty, the ECB shall address 
an annual report 
on the activities 
of the ESCB and on the monetary policy of both 
the previous and 
the current year 
to the European 
Parliament, the 
Council and the 
Commission, and also to 
the European Council. 15.4 The reports 
and statements referred 
to in this Article shall be made available to interested parties 
free of charge. 
ARTICLE 16 - Bank notes In accordance with Article 105a(l) of this 
Treaty, the Governing Council shall 
have the exclusive right to 
authorise the issue of bank notes within the Community. 
The ECB 
and the national 
central banks 
may issue such 
notes. The bank 
notes issued by the ECB and the 
national central 
banks shall be the only 
such notes 
to have the status of legal tender 
within the Community. The ECB shall 
respect as far as possible 
existing practices 
regarding the issue and design of bank 
notes. CHAPTER IV - MONETARY FUNCTIONS AND OPERATIONS OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 17 - Accounts with the ECB and the national central 
banks In order to conduct their 
operations, the ECB and the national 
central banks may open accounts 
for credit institutions, 
public entities 
and other market 
participants and accept assets, including book-entry 
securities, as collateral. ARTICLE 18 - Open market and 
credit operations 
18.1 In order to achieve the objectives 
of the ESCB 
and to carry out 
its tasks, 
the ECB and the 
national central 
banks may: Annex I11 - operate in the financial markets 
by buying and selling outright 
(spot and forward) 
or under repurchase 
agreement and 
by lending or borrowing 
claims and marketable 
.instruments, whether in 
Community or in non-Community currencies, as well as precious metals ; - conduct credit 
operations with credit institutions and other 
market participants, with lending being based 
on adequate collateral. 18.2 The ECB 
shall establish general principles 
for open market and credit operations 
carried out by itself or the national central 
banks, including for the announcement 
of conditions under which they stand 
ready to enter 
into such transactions. ARTICLE 19 
- Minimum reserves 19.1 Subject to Article 
2, the ECB may 
require credit institutions 
established in Member States to hold minimum reserves on accounts with the ECB and 
national central 
banks in pursuance of monetary policy objectives. Regulations concerning the 
calculation and determination of the required 
minimum reserves 
may be established 
by the Governing Council. In cases of non-compliance the ECB shall be entitled to 
levy penalty 
interest and to 
impose other sanctions 
with comparable effect. 19.2 For the application 
of this Article, the Council shall, in 
accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42, define the basis 
for minimum reserves and the maximum 
permissible ratios between 
those reserves 
and their basis, as 
well as the appropriate sanctions 
in cases of non-compliance. ARTICLE 20 - Other instruments of 
monetary control The Governing 
Council may, by a majority of 
two thirds of the votes cast, decide upon 
the use of such 
other operational methods 
of monetary control 
as it sees fit, respecting Article 
2. The Council shall, 
in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 42, define the scope 
of such methods if 
they impose obligations on third parties. ARTICLE 21 - Operations with public entities 
21.1 In accordance with Article 104 of this 
Treaty, overdrafts 
or any other 
type of 
credit facility with the ECB or 
with the national central 
banks in favour of Community institutions or bodies, 
central governments, 
regional, local or other 
public authorities, other bodies governed 
by public law or public undertakings of 
Member States shall be prohibited, as 
shall the purchase directly from 
them by the ECB or national central 
banks of debt instruments. 21.2 The 
ECB and national 
central banks may act as fiscal agents for 
the entities referred to 
in Article 21.1. 21.3 The provisions of this Article shall 
not apply to publicly-owned credit institutions which, in the context of the supply 
of reserves by central banks, 
shall be given the 
same treatment by national central banks and the ECB 
as private credit institutions. 
Annex I11 ARTICLE 22 - Clearing and payment systems The ECB and national 
central banks may provide facilities, 
and the ECB may issue regulations, 
to ensure efficient 
and sound clearing and 
payment systems within 
the Community and 
with other countries. 
ARTICLE 23 - External operations 
The ECB and national 
central banks 
may: - establish relations with central banks 
and financial 
institutions in other countries 
and, where appropriate, with international organisations; 
- acquire and sell spot and forward 
all types 
of foreign exchange assets and precious 
metals; the term "foreign exchange asset" 
shall include 
securities and 
all other assets in the currency of any 
country or units of 
account and 
in whatever form held; 
- hold and 
manage the assets referred 
to in this Article; - conduct all 
types of 
banking transactions in relations with third countries 
and international organisations, including borrowing and lending operations. 
ARTICLE 24 - Other operations 
In addition to operations arising 
from their tasks, the ECB and 
the national central 
banks may enter into operations for 
their administrative purposes or for 
their staff. CHAPTER V - PRUDENTIAL SUPERVISION 
ARTICLE 25 - Prudential supervision 
25.1 The ECB may offer advice to and 
be consulted 
by the Council, 
the Commission and 
the competent authorities of 
the Member States 
on the scope and implementation 
of Community 
legislation relating 
to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions and to 
the stability of the financial system. 25.2 In accordance with any decision 
of the 
Council under 
Article 105(6) of this Treaty, 
the ECB may perform specific tasks 
concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and other financial 
institutions with the exception of insurance undertakings. CWTER V1 - FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 26 - Financial accounts 
26.1 The financial year 
of the ECB and the national central 
banks shall begin on 
the first day of January and end on the last day 
of December. 26.2 The annual accounts 
of the ECB shall be drawn up 
by the Executive Board, 
in accordance with the principles established 
by the Governing Council. The accounts 
shall be approved by the Governing Council and 
shall thereafter 
be published. 26.3 For analytical and 
operational purposes, the Executive 
Board shall draw up a consolidated balance sheet of 
the ESCB, comprising 
those Annex I11 assets and liabilities 
of the 
national central 
banks that fall within 
the ESCB . 26.4 For the application of this 
Article, the Governing Council shall establish the necessary 
rules for standardising 
the accounting and reporting of operations undertaken 
by the national central banks. ARTICLE 27 - Auditing 27.1 The accounts 
of the ECB 
and national central 
banks shall 
be audited by independent external auditors recommended 
by the Governing Council and 
approved by the Council. 
The auditors shall 
have full power to examine 
all books and 
accounts of the 
ECB and 
national central 
banks and obtain full information about their transactions. 
27.2 The provisions 
of Article 188b of this Treaty 
shall only 
apply to an examination of the 
operational efficiency 
of the management 
of the ECB . ARTICLE 28 - Capital of the ECB 28.1 The capital 
of the ECB, which 
shall become operational upon its establishment, shall 
be ECU 5,000 million. The capital 
may be increased by such amounts as may be decided by the Governing Council acting 
by the qualified majority provided 
for in Article 10.3, within the limits and under the conditions set by the Council under the procedure laid 
down in Article 42. 28.2 The national central 
banks shall 
be the sole 
subscribers to and 
holders of the 
capital of the ECB. The subscription 
of capital shall 
be according to 
the key established in accordance with Article 29. 28.3 The Governing 
Council, acting by the qualified majority provided for in Article 10.3, shall determine 
the extent to 
which and the form in which the capital shall 
be paid up. 28.4 Subject to Article 
28.5, the shares of 
the national central banks in the subscribed capital 
of the ECB may 
not be transferred, pledged or attached. 
28.5 If the key 
referred to in Article 29 is adjusted, the 
national central banks shall transfer 
among themselves capital shares to the extent 
necessary to ensure that the distribution of capital shares corresponds to 
the adjusted key. The Governing Council shall determine 
the terms and conditions 
of such transfers. ARTICLE 29 - Key for capital subscription 
29.1 When in accordance with the 
procedure referred to in Article 1091(1) of this Treaty the ESCB and the 
ECB have been 
established, the key for 
subscription of the 
ECB's capital shall 
be established. Each 
national central bank shall be assigned a weighting 
in this key which 
shall be equal to 
the sum of: - 50% of 
the share of its respective Member State 
in the population of the 
Community in the penultimate year 
preceding the establishment 
of the ESCB; - 50% of 
the share 
of its 
respective Member State 
in the gross 
domestic product at market prices of 
the Community as recorded Annex I11 in the last five 
years preceding 
the penultimate 
year before the establishment of 
the ESCB; The percentages shall be rounded 
up to the nearest multiple 
of 0.05% points. 29.2 The statistical 
data to be used for the application of this 
Article shall be 
provided by the Commission 
in accordance with the rules 
adopted by the Council under 
the procedure provided 
for in Article 42. 29.3 The weightings 
assigned to the 
national central 
banks shall 
be adjusted every five years after the 
establishment of the ESCB 
by analogy with the provisions laid down in Article 29.1. The adjusted key shall apply 
with effect from the first day 
of the following year. 
29.4 The Governing Council 
shall take 
all other measures necessary 
for the application 
of this Article. 
ARTICLE 30 - Transfer of foreign reserve assets 
to the ECB 
30.1 Without prejudice to Article 28, the ECB shall 
be provided 
by the national central 
banks with foreign reserve assets, other than Member 
States' currencies, ECUs, IMF reserve positions and SDRs, up to an amount equivalent to ECU 50,000 million. The Governing Council shall decide upon 
the proportion to be called 
up by the ECB following its establishment 
and the amounts called up at later dates. The ECB 
shall have the full right to hold 
and manage the foreign reserves that are 
transferred to it and to use them for 
the purposes set out 
in this Statute. 30.2 The contributions of each national central 
bank shall be fixed in proportion to its 
share in the subscribed capital of the 
ECB. 30.3 Each national central 
bank shall be credited by the ECB with a claim equivalent to 
its contribution. 
The Governing 
Council shall determine 
the denomination 
and remuneration of such claims. 30.4 Further calls 
of foreign reserve assets beyond the 
limit set in Article 30.1 may be effected by the ECB, in accordance with Article 30.2, within the limits and 
under the conditions set 
by the Council in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42. 30.5 The ECB may 
hold and manage IMF reserve positions and SDRs and provide for the pooling 
of such assets. 30.6 The Governing Council shall 
take all other measures necessary 
for the application 
of this Article. 
ARTICLE 31 - Foreign reserve assets held by national central banks 
31.1 The national 
central banks shall be allowed to perform 
transactions in fulfilment of their 
obligations towards international 
organisations in accordance with Article 23. 31.2 All other operations in foreign reserve assets remaining 
with the national central 
banks after the transfers referred 
to in Article 30, and Member 
States' transactions with their foreign exchange working 
balances shall, above 
a certain limit to 
be established 
within the framework of Article 31.3, 
be subject 
to approval by the ECB 
in order to Annex I11 ensure consistency 
with the exchange rate and monetary 
policies of the Community. 31.3 The Governing 
Council shall 
issue gu'idelines with a view to facilitating such 
operations. ARTICLE 32 - Allocation of monetary income of national central banks 
32.1 The income 
accruing to the national central 
banks in the performance of the 
ESCB's monetary policy function (hereinafter referred 
to as "monetary 
income") shall be allocated at the end of 
each financial 
year in accordance with the provisions 
of this 
Article. 32.2 Subject to Article 32.3, 
the amount of 
each national 
central bank's monetary income 
shall be equal 
to its annual income derived from 
its assets held against notes 
in circulation and deposit liabilities to credit institutions. These assets shall 
be earmarked by national central 
banks in accordance with guidelines to 
be established by the Governing Council. 32.3 If, after the start 
of the third stage, the balance sheet 
structures of the national central 
banks do not, in the judgement of the 
Governing Council, 
permit the application of Article 
32.2, the Governing Council, acting 
by a qualified 
majority, may decide that, by way 
of derogation from Article 32.2, monetary income shall be 
measured according to an alternative method for 
a period of not more than five 
years. 32.4 The amount 
of each national central bank's monetary income shall be reduced 
by an amount equivalent to any interest paid by that central bank on its deposit 
liabilities to credit institutions in accordance with Article 19. The Governing Council 
may decide that national central 
banks shall be indemnified against costs 
incurred in connection with the issue of bank notes or 
in exceptional circumstances 
for specific losses arising from 
monetary policy operations undertaken for the ESCB. Indemnification shall be in a form deemed appropriate in the judgement of the Governing Council; 
these amounts may be offset against 
the national central 
banks' monetary income. 32.5 The sum 
of the national central banks' monetary income shall be allocated to the national 
central banks in proportion to their paid-up 
shares in the capital 
of the ECB, 
subject to any decision taken 
by the Governing Council 
pursuant to Article 33.2. 32.6 The clearing 
and settlement of the balances 
arising from the allocation of monetary income 
shall be carried out 
by the ECB in accordance with guidelines established by the Governing 
Council. 32.7 The Governing 
Council shall take 
all other measures necessary 
for the application of this 
Article. ARTICLE 33 - Allocation of net 
profits and losses of the 
ECB 33.1 The net profit of the ECB shall 
be transferred in the following 
order : (a) an amount to 
be determined 
by the Governing Council, which 
may not exceed 20% of the net profit, shall 
be transferred to the general reserve 
fund subject 
to a limit equal to 100% of the capital ; (b) the remaining net 
profit shall be distributed to the shareholders of the ECB in proportion to their paid-up shares. Annex I11 33.2 In the event of a loss incurred 
by the ECB, the shortfall may 
be offset against the general 
reserve fund 
of the ECB and, if necessary, following a decision by the Governing Council, against the monetary 
income of the relevant financial year 
in proportion and up to the amounts 
allocated to the national central 
banks in accordance with Article 32.5. CHAPTER V11 - GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 34 - Legal acts 
34.1 In accordance with Article 108a of this Treaty, the ECB shall: - make regulations 
to the extent necessary to implement the tasks defined in Article 3.1, 
first indent, Articles 19.1, 
22 or 25.2 and in cases which shall be laid down in the acts of the 
Council referred to in Article 42; - take decisions necessary 
for carrying out 
the tasks 
entrusted to the ESCB under this 
Treaty and 
this Statute; - make recommendations and deliver opinions. 
34.2 A regulation shall have general 
application. It shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable 
in all Member 
States. Recommendations and opinions shall 
have no binding force. 
A decision shall 
be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed. Articles 190 to 192 of this Treaty shall apply 
to regulations and decisions adopted by the ECB. The ECB may decide 
to publish 
its decisions, recommendations 
and opinions. 
34.3 Within the limits 
and under the 
conditions adopted by the Council under the 
procedure laid down in Article 42, the ECB shall be entitled to 
impose fines or 
periodic penalty payments 
on undertakings for failure to comply with obligations under its regulations 
and decisions. ARTICLE 35 - Judicial control 
and related matters 35.1 The acts or 
omissions of the ECB shall be open to review or interpretation by the Court of Justice in the cases and under the conditions laid down in this Treaty. The ECB 
may institute proceedings in the cases and 
under the conditions laid 
down in this Treaty. 35.2 Disputes between 
the ECB, on 
the one 
hand, and its creditors, 
debtors or any other 
person, on the other, shall be decided by the competent national 
courts, save where jurisdiction has been 
conferred upon the Court of Justice. 35.3 The ECB shall 
be subject to the liability regime provided for 
in Article 215 of this Treaty. The national central banks shall be liable according 
to their 
respective national 
laws. 35.4 The Court 
of Justice shall have jurisdiction to give judgement pursuant to any 
arbitration clause contained 
in a contract concluded 
by or on behalf of the 
ECB, whether that contract be governed by public or private law. 35.5 A decision of the ECB to bring 
an action before the Court of Justice shall 
be taken by the Governing Council. 
Annex I11 35.6 The Court of Justice shall 
have jurisdiction 
in disputes concerning the fulfilment by a national central 
bank of obligations under this Statute. 
If the ECB considers that a national central 
bank has failed to fulfil an obligation under this Statute, it shall deliver 
a reasoned opinion on the matter after giving the 
national central 
bank concerned 
the opportunity to submit its observations. 
If the national central bank concerned does not comply with the opinion within the period laid 
down by the ECB, the latter may 
bring the matter before the Court of Justice. ARTICLE 36 - Staff 36.1 The 
Governing Council, on a 
proposal from the Executive Board, shall lay 
down the conditions of employment of the 
staff of the 
ECB. 36.2 The 
Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction 
in any dispute 
between the ECB 
and its servants 
within the limits and under the conditions laid down in the conditions of employment. ARTICLE 37 - Seat Before the 
end of 
1992, the decision as to where the seat 
of the ECB will be established shall 
be taken by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the 
level of Heads of State or of Government. ARTICLE 38 - Professional secrecy 38.1 Members of the governing bodies 
and the staff of the ECB and the national central 
banks shall be required, even 
after their duties 
have ceased, not to disclose information 
of the kind covered 
by the obligation of professional secrecy. 38.2 Persons having access 
to data covered by Community legislation 
imposing an obligation of secrecy shall 
be subject to such legislation. 
ARTICLE 39 - Signatories The ECB shall 
be legally committed to third parties 
by the President or by two members 
of the 
Executive Board or by the signatures of two members of the 
staff of the ECB who have been 
duly authorised by the President to sign 
on behalf of the ECB. ARTICLE 40 - Privileges and immunities The ECB 
shall enjoy in the territories of the Member States 
such privileges and immunities as are necessary for 
the performance 
of its tasks, under the 
conditions laid down in the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities annexed to the Treaty 
establishing a Single Council 
and a Single Commission 
of the European Communities. 
CHAPTER V111 - AMENDMENT OF 
THE STATUTE AND COMPLEMENTARY LEGISLATION 
ARTICLE 41 - Simplified amendment 
procedure 41.1 In accordance with Article 106(5) of this Treaty, Articles 5.1, 
5.2, 5.3, 17, 18, 19.1, 22, 23, 
24, 26, 32.2, 32.3, 32.4, 32.6, 
33.l(a) and 36 of this Statute may 
be amended by the Council, acting either 
by a qualified majority 
on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting 
Annex 111 the Commission, or unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the ECB. In either case 
the assent of the European Parliament 
shall be required. 41.2 A recommendation made 
by the ECB under this Article shall require a unanimous decision 
by the Governing Council. ARTICLE 42 - Complementary legislation 
In accordance with Article 106(6) of this Treaty, immediately after the decision on the date for the beginning of the third 
stage, the Council, acting by a qualified majority either on a 
proposal from the Commission and after consulting 
the European Parliament 
and the ECB, or on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting the European Parliament 
and the 
Commission, shall adopt the provisions referred to in Articles 4, 5.4, 19.2, 20, 28.1, 29.2, 30.4 and 
34.3 of this Statute. CHAPTER IX - TRANSITIONAL AND OTHER PROVISIONS FOR 
THE ESCB ARTICLE 43 - General provisions 43.1 A derogation as referred 
to in Article 109k(l) of this Treaty 
shall entail that the following 
Articles of this Statute shall not confer any rights or impose any obligations 
on the Member State concerned: 
3, 6, 9.2, 12.1, 14.3, 
16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 
26.2, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 
50 and 52. 
43.2 The central banks of Member States 
with a derogation as 
specified in Article 109k(l) of this Treaty shall 
retain their powers 
in the field of monetary policy according 
to national law. 43.3 In accordance with Article 109k(4) of this 
Treaty, "Member 
Statesn shall be read as "Member States without a derogation" in the following Articles 
of this Statute: 
3, 11.2, 19, 34.2 and 50. 43.4 "National central banks" 
shall be read as "central 
banks of Member States without 
a derogationn in 
the following Articles 
of this Statute: 9.2, 10.1, 10.3, 12.1, 16, 17, 18, 
22, 23, 27, 30, 31, 
32, 33.2 and 52. 43.5 "Shareholders" shall be read as "central banks of Member States without a derogation" in 
Articles 10.3 and 33.1. 43.6 "Subscribed capital 
of the ECB" shall be read as "capital 
of the ECB 
subscribed by the central banks of Member States without 
a derogationn in Articles 10.3 and 
30.2. ARTICLE 44 - Transitional tasks 
of the 
ECB The ECB shall take over 
those tasks of 
the EM1 which, because of the derogations of one or more Member States, still have to be performed in the third stage. 
The ECB shall give 
advice in the preparations for 
the abrogation of the derogations specified in Article 1091 of this Treaty. 
ARTICLE 45 - The General Council of the ECB 
45.1 Without prejudice to Article 106(3) of this Treaty, the General Council shall be constituted as a third decision-making body of the ECB. Annex I11 45.2 The General Council 
shall comprise the President and Vice-President of the ECB and the 
Governors of 
t.he national central 
banks. The other members 
of the Executive Board may participate, without having the right to vote, 
in meetings of the General Council. 45.3 The responsibilities 
of the General Council are 
listed in full in Article 47 of this Statute. ARTICLE 46 - Rules of procedure of the General Council 46.1 The President 
or, in his absence, the Vice-President of the ECB 
shall chair the 
General Council of the ECB. 46.2 The President 
of the Council and a member 
of the 
Commission may participate, without having the right 
to vote, in 
meetings of the General Council. 46.3 The President 
shall prepare the 
meetings of the 
General Council. 46.4 By 
way of derogation from Article 
12.3, the 
General Council 
shall adopt its Rules 
of Procedure. 
46.5 The Secretariat of the General Council shall 
be provided by the ECB . ARTICLE 47 - Responsibilities of the General Council 
47.1 The General Council 
shall: - perform the tasks referred 
to in Article 44; - contribute to the advisory 
functions referred to in Articles 4 
and 25.1. 47.2 The 
General Council shall contribute to: - the collection 
of statistical information as referred to in 
Article 5; - the reporting activities of the ECB 
as referred to in Article 15; - the establishment 
of the necessary rules for the application of Article 26 as referred to in Article 26.4; - the taking of all other measures 
necessary for the application of Article 29 as referred to in Article 29.4; - the laying down of the conditions of employment of the staff of the ECB as referred to in Article 36. 47.3 The General Council shall contribute to the necessary 
preparations for irrevocably fixing 
the exchange rates 
of the 
currencies of Member States with a derogation against 
the currencies, or the single 
currency, of the Member States without a derogation, 
as referred to in Article 1091(5) of this Treaty. 47.4 The General Council 
shall be informed by the President of the ECB of decisions of the 
Governing Council. ARTICLE 48 - Transitional provisions for the capital 
of the ECB 
In accordance with Article 29.1 each national central 
bank shall be assigned a weighting 
in the key for 
subscription of the ECB's capital. By 
way of derogation from Article 28.3, central banks of 
Member States with a derogation shall not 
pay up their subscribed capital unless 
the General Council, 
acting by a majority representing at least two thirds 
Annex I11 of the subscribed 
capital of the ECB and at least half 
of the shareholders, 
decides that 
a minimal percentage has 
to be paid up as a contribution to the operational costs 
of the 
ECB. ARTICLE 49 - Deferred payment of capital, reserves and provisions 
of the ECB 49.1 The central 
bank of 
a Member State whose derogation has 
been abrogated shall pay up its subscribed share of the 
capital of the ECB 
to the same extent as the 
central banks of other Member States without 
a derogation, and 
shall transfer 
to the ECB 
foreign reserve assets 
in accordance with Article 30.1. The sum 
to be transferred shall be determined by multiplying the ECU value 
at current exchange 
rates of the 
foreign reserve assets 
which have already been transferred 
to the ECB 
in accordance with Article 30.1, 
by the ratio between 
the number 
of shares subscribed 
by the national central 
bank concerned 
and the number of shares 
already paid up by the other national central 
banks. 49.2 In addition to 
the payment 
to be made in accordance with Article 49.1, the central bank concerned 
shall contribute to the 
reserves of the ECB, 
to those provisions equivalent 
to reserves, and to 
the amount still to 
be appropriated to the 
reserves and 
provisions corresponding to the balance 
of the profit and loss account 
as at 31st December of the year 
prior to the abrogation 
of the derogation. The sum to 
be contributed shall 
be determined by multiplying the amount of the reserves, as defined above 
and as stated 
in the approved balance sheet of 
the ECB, 
by the 
ratio between the number 
of shares subscribed 
by the central bank concerned 
and the number 
of shares already 
paid up by the other central banks. ARTICLE 50 - Initial appointment of the members 
of the Executive Board When the Executive 
Board of the ECB is being established, the President, the Vice-President 
and the other members of the 
Executive Board shall be appointed by common accord of the governments of 
the Member States 
at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government, on a recommendation from 
the Council and after consulting 
the European Parliament and 
the Council of the EMI. The President 
of the Executive 
Board shall be 
appointed for 
eight years. By way of derogation from 
Article 11.2, the Vice-President shall 
be appointed for four years 
and the other members of 
the Executive 
Board for 
terms of 
office of between 
five and eight years. 
No term 
of office shall be renewable. The 
number of members 
of the Executive Board may be smaller than 
provided for in Article 11.1, but in no circumstance shall 
it be less than four. ARTICLE 51 - Derogation from 
Article 32 51.1 If, after the start 
of the third stage, the Governing Council 
decides that 
the application of Article 
32 results in significant changes in national central 
banks' relative income positions, the amount 
of income to be allocated pursuant to Article 32 shall be 
reduced by a uniform percentage which shall not exceed 60% in the first financial 
year after the start of the 
third stage and 
which shall decrease by at least 12 percentage points in each subsequent financial year. 51.2 Article 51.1 shall be applicable for 
not more than five 
financial years after 
the start of the third stage. 
Annex I11 ARTICLE 52 - Exchange of bank notes in Conrmunity currencies Following the irrevocable fixing of exchange 
rates, the Governing Council shall take 
the necessary measures 
to ensure that 
bank notes denominated in currencies with irrevocably fixed exchange rates are 
exchanged by the national central 
banks at their respective 
par values. ARTICLE 53 - Applicability of the transitional provisions 
If and as long as there are Member States 
with a derogation Articles 43 to 48 shall be applicable. Annex IV TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNION AS SIGNED ON 7TH FEBRUARY 
1992 PROTOCOL ON THE STATUTE OF THE 
EUROPEAN MONETARY INSTITUTE 
THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES, 
DESIRING to lay down the Statute of the 
European Monetary Institute, 
HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, 
which shall be annexed to the 
Treaty establishing 
the European Community: ARTICLE 1 - Constitution and name 1.1 The European 
Monetary Institute (EMI) 
shall be established 
in accordance with Article 109f of this 
Treaty; it shall perform its functions 
and carry out its activities 
in accordance with the provisions of this 
Treaty and of 
this Statute. 
1.2 The members 
of the 
EM1 shall be the central banks of the 
Member States ("national central banks"). For the 
purposes of 
this Statute, 
the Institut monetaire luxembourgeois shall 
be regarded as the central 
bank of 
Luxembourg. 1.3 Pursuantto Article109f of this 
Treaty, both the Committee 
of Governors and the European 
Monetary Co-operation Fund 
(EMCF) shall be dissolved. All assets 
and liabilities of the 
EMCF shall pass 
automatically to the EMI. ARTICLE 2 - Objectives The EM1 shall contribute 
to the realisation 
of the conditions necessary for the transition 
to the third stage of Economic 
and Monetary Union, in 
particular by: - strengthening the co-ordination 
of monetary policies 
with a view to ensuring price stability; - making the preparations required 
for the establishment 
of the European System 
of Central Banks 
(ESCB), and for 
the conduct of a single monetary 
policy and the creation of 
a single currency in the third 
stage; - overseeing the development of the 
ECU. ARTICLE 3 - General principles 3.1 The EM1 shall carry 
out the 
tasks and 
functions conferred upon it by this Treaty 
and this Statute without 
prejudice to the responsibility 
of the competent authorities for 
the conduct 
of the monetary 
policy within the respective Member 
States. 3.2 The EM1 shall act 
in accordance with the objectives and 
principles stated in Article 2 of the 
Statute of the 
ESCB. ARTICLE 4 - Primary tasks 4.1 In accordance with Article 109f(2) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall : - strengthen co-operation 
between the 
national central banks; 
Annex IV - strengthen the co-ordination 
of the 
monetary policies of 
the Member States 
with the aim of ensuring price 
stability; - monitor the functioning of 
the ~uro~ean Monetary System 
(EMS); - hold consultations concerning 
issues falling 
within the competence of the national central 
banks and 
affecting the stability of 
financial institutions and markets; 
- take over the tasks of 
the EMCF; in particular it shall perform 
the functions 
referred to in Articles 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3; - facilitate the use 
of the ECU and oversee its development, 
including the smooth functioning of the 
ECU clearing system. The EM1 shall also: 
- hold regular 
consultations concerning the 
course of monetary 
policies and the use 
of monetary policy instruments; - normally be consulted 
by the national monetary authorities 
before they take decisions 
on the course of 
monetary policy in the context 
of the common framework for ex ante co-ordination. 
4.2 At the latest 
by 31st December 1996, 
the EM1 shall specify the regulatory, organisational 
and logistical framework necessary for 
the ESCB 
to perform its 
tasks in the third stage, in accordance with the principle 
of an open market economy with free competition. This 
framework shall 
be submitted by the Council 
of the EM1 for decision to 
the ECB at the date 
of its establishment. In accordance with Article 109f(3) of this Treaty, the 
EM1 shall in particular: - prepare the instruments 
and the procedures 
necessary for 
carrying out 
a single 
monetary policy in the third 
stage; - promote the harmonisation, where necessary, 
of the rules 
and practices governing the 
collection, compilation 
and distribution of statistics 
in the areas 
within its field of competence; - prepare the rules for 
operations to be undertaken by the national central 
banks in the framework of the 
ESCB; - promote the efficiency 
of cross-border payments; 
- supervise the technical preparation 
of ECU bank notes. ARTICLE 5 - Advisory functions 
5.1 In accordance with Article 109f(4) of this Treaty, the Council 
of the EM1 may formulate opinions or recommendations 
on the overall 
orientation of monetary 
policy and 
exchange rate policy as well as on 
related measures introduced in each Member 
State. The EM1 may submit opinions or recommendations 
to governments and to 
the Council on policies which might affect 
the internal or external monetary 
situation in the Community and, in particular, the functioning of the EMS. 5.2 The Council 
of the EM1 may also make recommendations to 
the monetary authorities 
of the 
Member States concerning the conduct of their monetary policy. 5.3 In accordance with Article 109f(6) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall be consulted by the Council regarding 
any proposed Community 
act within its field 
of competence. 
Within the limits and 
under the conditions set out by the Council acting 
by a qualified majority on a proposal 
from the Commission 
and after consulting 
the European Parliament 
and the EMI, the 
EM1 shall be consulted by the authorities 
of the Member States on any draft legislative 
Annex IV provision within its field 
of competence, in particular with regard to Article 4.2. 5.4 In accordance with Article 109f(5) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 may publish its opinions 
and its recommendations. ARTICLE 6 - Operational and technical functions 
6.1 The EM1 shall: - provide for the multilateralisation of positions 
resulting from 
interventions by the national central 
banks in Community currencies and the multilateralisation of intra-Community settlements; - administer the very short-term financing mechanism 
provided for 
by the Agreement 
of 13th March 1979 between the central 
banks of the Member 
States of the European Economic Community laying down the operating procedures 
for the European Monetary System 
(hereinafter referred 
to as "EMS Agreementn) and the short-term 
monetary support mechanism provided for in the Agreement 
between the central 
banks of the Member States 
of the European 
Economic Community of 
9th February 1970, as amended; 
- perform the functions referred 
to in Article 11 of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 1969188 of 24th June 
1988 establishing a 
single facility 
providing medium-term financial assistance for 
Member States' balances of 
payments. 6.2 The 
EM1 may receive 
monetary reserves 
from the national 
central banks and issue ECUs against such 
assets for the 
purpose of implementing 
the EMS Agreement. These ECUs may be used 
by the EM1 and the national 
central banks as a 
means of settlement and 
for transactions between them 
and the 
EMI. The EM1 shall take the necessary administrative measures for 
the implementation of this 
paragraph. 6.3 The EM1 may grant to the 
monetary authorities 
of third 
countries and to international 
monetary institutions the 
status of 
"Other Holders" of ECUs 
and fix the terms and conditions under which such ECUs may be acquired, held 
or used by Other Holders. 
6.4 The EM1 shall be entitled to hold and manage foreign 
exchange reserves as 
an agent for 
and at the request 
of national central 
banks. Profits and losses 
regarding these reserves shall 
be for the account 
of the national central 
bank depositing 
the reserves. The EM1 shall perform this 
function on 
the basis of bilateral 
contracts in accordance with rules laid 
down in a decision of the 
EMI. These rules shall ensure that transactions 
with these reserves 
shall not interfere with the monetary policy and 
exchange rate 
policy of 
the competent monetary 
authority of 
any Member State and 
shall be consistent with the objectives 
of the EM1 and the proper 
functioning of the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
of the 
EMS. ARTICLE 7 - Other tasks 
7.1 Once a year the 
EM1 shall address a 
report to the Council 
on the state 
of the 
preparations for the 
third stage. These reports 
shall include an assessment of the progress towards 
convergence in the Community, and cover 
in particular the 
adaptation of monetary policy instruments and 
the preparation 
of the procedures necessary for carrying out 
a single 
monetary policy in the third stage, as well as 
the statutory 
requirements Annex IV to be fulfilled for national 
central banks 
to become an integral part of 
the ESCB. 7.2 In accordance with the Council decisions referred 
to in Article 109f(7) of this 
Treaty, the EM1 may perform other tasks for 
the preparation of the third stage. ARTICLE 8 - Independence The members 
of the Council of 
the EM1 who are the representatives of their institutions 
shall, with respect to 
their activities, act according 
to their 
own responsibilities. In exercising the powers and performing the tasks and duties conferred 
upon them 
by this Treaty and 
this Statute, the Council of the EM1 may not seek or take any 
instructions from Community institutions or 
bodies or governments of Member States. The Community institutions and bodies 
as well 
as the governments of the 
Member States undertake to respect this principle and 
not to seek to influence the 
Council of the EM1 in the performance of its tasks. ARTICLE 9 - Administration 9.1 In accordance with Article 109f(l) of this 
Treaty, the EM1 shall be directed and 
managed by the Council of 
the EMI. 9.2 The Council 
of the EM1 shall consist of a 
President and the Governors of the national 
central banks, one 
of whom shall be Vice-President. If a Governor is 
prevented from attending 
a meeting, he may nominate another 
representative of 
his institution. 9.3 The President shall 
be appointed 
by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the level of Heads of 
State or of 
Government, on a recommendation from, 
as the case 
may be, the Committee of 
Governors or the Council 
of the EMI, and after consulting the 
European Parliament and the 
Council. The President 
shall be selected 
from among persons 
of recognised standing and professional experience 
in monetary or banking matters. Only nationals 
of Member States may be President 
of the EMI. The Council of the 
EM1 shall appoint 
the Vice-President. The President and 
Vice-President shall be appointed for a 
period of three years. 9.4 The President 
shall perform 
his duties on 
a full-time basis. He shall not engage 
in any occupation, 
whether gainful or 
not, unless exemption is 
exceptionally granted 
by the Council of the 
EMI. 9.5 The President 
shall: - prepare and chair 
the meetings of the 
Council of the 
EMI; - without prejudice to Article 22, present the views of 
the EM1 externally; - be responsible for 
the day-to-day management 
of the 
EMI. In the absence 
of the President, his duties shall 
be performed 
by the Vice-President. 
9.6 The terms and conditions of employment of 
the President, 
in particular his salary, pension 
and other social security 
benefits, shall be the subject of a 
contract with the EM1 and shall be fixed by the Council of the EM1 on a proposal from a Committee comprising three 
members appointed by the Committee of Governors 
or the Council of the EMI, as the 
case may Annex IV be, and three members 
appointed by the Council. The President 
shall not have the right to 
vote on 
matters referred to in this paragraph. 
9.7 If the President no 
longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of his duties 
or if he has been 
guilty of serious misconduct, the Court of Justice may, on application by the Council of the 
EMI, compulsorily retire him. 
9.8 The Rules 
of Procedure of the EM1 shall be adopted by the Council of the EMI. 
ARTICLE 10 - Meetings of the Council 
of the EMI and voting procedures 
10.1 The 
Council of the EM1 shall meet at least ten times 
a year. The proceedings of Council meetings 
shall be confidential. The 
Council of the EM1 may, acting unanimously, decide to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public. 10.2 Each member 
of the Council of the EM1 or his nominee shall have 
one vote. 10.3 Save as 
otherwise provided for in this Statute, the Council of the EM1 shall act by a simple majority 
of its members. 10.4 Decisions to be taken in the context of Articles 4.2, 5.4, 6.2 
and 6.3 shall require unanimity of the members of the Council of the EMI. 
The adoption of opinions and recommendations under Articles 
5.1 and 5.2, the adoption of decisions under Articles 
6.4, 16 and 23.6 and the adoption of guidelines under Article 
15.3 shall require a qualified majority of two-thirds of the members of the Council of the EMI. 
ARTICLE 11 - Inter-institutional co-operation and reporting 
requirements 11.1 The 
President of the Council and a member of the Commission may participate, without having the right 
to vote, in meetings of the Council of the EMI. 11.2 The 
President of the EM1 shall be invited to participate 
in Council meetings 
when the Council is discussing 
matters relating 
to the objectives and tasks of the EMI. 
11.3 At 
a date to be established in the Rules of Procedure, the EM1 shall prepare 
an annual report 
on its activities and on monetary and financial conditions 
in the Community. The annual report, together with 
the annual accounts 
of the EMI, shall be addressed to the 
European Parliament, the Council and the 
Commission and also to the European Council. 
The President of the EM1 may, at the request of the European Parliament or on his own initiative, 
be heard by the competent Committees 
of the European Parliament. 11.4 Reports published by the EM1 shall be made available 
to interested parties free of charge. ARTICLE 12 - Currency denomination The operations of the 
EM1 shall be expressed in ECU. ARTICLE 13 - Seat Before the end of 1992, the decision as to where the seat of the EM1 will be established shall 
be taken by common accord of the Annex IV governments of the Member States 
at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government. ARTICLE 14 - Legal capacity The EMI, which 
in accordance with Article 109f(l) of this 
Treaty shall 
have legal personality, 
shall enjoy 
in each of the Member 
States the 
most extensive legal 
capacity accorded 
to legal 
persons under their law; it may, in 
particular, acquire 
or dispose of movable or immovable property 
and may be a party to legal 
proceedings. ARTICLE 15 - Legal acts 
15.1 In the performance of 
its tasks, and under 
the conditions laid down in this Statute, the EM1 shall: - deliver opinions; 
- make recommendations; 
- adopt guidelines, 
and take 
decisions, which 
shall be addressed to the national central 
banks. 15.2 Opinions and recommendations of the 
EM1 shall have no binding force . 15.3 The Council of the 
EM1 may adopt guidelines laying 
down the methods for the implementation 
of the conditions necessary for 
the ESCB 
to perform its functions in the third stage. 
EM1 guidelines shall have 
no binding force; they shall 
be submitted for decision to 
the ECB. 
15.4 Without prejudice to Article 3.1, a decision of the EM1 shall be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed. Articles 
190 and 191 of this Treaty shall 
apply to these decisions. 
ARTICLE 16 - Financial resources 16.1 The EM1 shall be endowed with its own resources. The size 
of the resources 
of the EM1 shall be determined by the Council of the 
EM1 with a view to ensuring 
the income deemed necessary to cover 
the administrative expenditure incurred 
in the performance of the 
tasks and functions 
of the 
EM1 . 16.2 The resources 
of the EM1 determined in accordance with Article 16.1 shall be provided out 
of contributions by the national central 
banks in accordance with the key referred to in Article 29.1 of the 
Statute of the ESCB 
and be paid up at the establishment of 
the EMI. For this purpose, the statistical 
data to be used for the determination 
of the key shall be provided by the Commission, 
in accordance with the rules adopted 
by the Council, acting by a qualified majority on a proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting 
the European Parliament, the Committee of Governors and the Committee referred to in Article 109c of this Treaty. 
16.3 The Council of the 
EM1 shall determine 
the form in which contributions shall 
be paid up. 
ARTICLE 17 - Annual accounts and auditing 17.1 The financial year 
of the EM1 shall begin 
on the first day 
of January and 
end on the last day of 
December. 17.2 The Council 
of the 
EM1 shall adopt an annual budget before the beginning of each financial year. Annex IV 
17.3 The annual accounts shall 
be drawn up in accordance with the principles established 
by the Council of the EMI. 
The annual accounts shall be approved by the Council of the EM1 and shall thereafter 
be published. 17.4 The annual accounts shall 
be audited by independent external auditors approved 
by the Council 
of the EMI. The auditors shall 
have full power to examine all 
books and accounts of the 
EM1 and to 
obtain full information about its 
transactions. The provisions of 
Article 188b of this Treaty shall 
only apply 
to an examination of the operational efficiency of 
the management 
of the EM1 . 17.5 Any surplus of the 
EM1 shall be transferred in the following 
order: (a) an amount to 
be determined 
by the Council of the 
EM1 shall be transferred to 
the general reserve fund 
of the 
EMI; (b) any remaining surplus shall 
be distributed to the 
national central banks in accordance with the key referred to 
in Article 16.2. 17.6 In the event of 
a loss incurred 
by the EMI, the shortfall shall 
be offset against the general reserve 
fund of the EMI. Any remaining shortfall shall 
be made good by contributions from the national central banks, in accordance with the key as 
referred to 
in Article 16.2. ARTICLE 18 - Staff 18.1 The Council 
of the EM1 shall lay 
down the conditions of employment of the staff of the 
EMI. 18.2 The Court 
of Justice shall 
have jurisdiction in any dispute 
between the EM1 and its servants 
within the limits and 
under the conditions laid down in the conditions of employment. ARTICLE 19 - Judicial control 
and related 
matters 19.1 The acts or 
omissions of the EM1 shall be open to review 
or interpretation by the Court of Justice in the cases and under the conditions laid down in this Treaty. The 
EM1 may institute proceedings 
in the cases and under the conditions laid 
down in this Treaty. 19.2 Disputes between the EMI, on the one 
hand, and its creditors, 
debtors or any 
other person, 
on the other, shall fall within 
the jurisdiction of the competent national 
courts, save where jurisdiction has been conferred 
upon the Court of Justice. 
19.3 The EM1 shall be subject to the liability regime 
provided for in Article 215 of this Treaty. 19.4 The Court 
of Justice shall have jurisdiction to give 
judgement pursuant to any arbitration clause 
contained in a contract concluded 
by or on behalf of 
the EMI, whether that contract be governed by public or 
private law. 
19.5 A decision of the EM1 to bring an action before the Court 
of Justice shall be taken by the Council of the 
EMI. Annex IV ARTICLE 20 - Professional secrecy 20.1 Members of 
the Council 
of the EM1 and the staff of the 
EM1 shall be required, even after 
their duties have ceased, not to disclose 
information of the kind 
covered by the obligation of professional secrecy. 
20.2 Persons having access 
to data covered by Community legislation 
imposing an obligation of secrecy shall 
be subject to such legislation. 
ARTICLE 21 - Privileges and 
inununities The EM1 shall enjoy in the territories of the 
Member States such privileges 
and immunities as are necessary for the 
performance of its tasks, under 
the conditions laid down in the Protocol on the Privileges and 
Immunities of the 
European Communities annexed 
to the 
Treaty establishing a 
Single Council and 
a Single Commission of the European Communities. 
ARTICLE 22 - Signatories The EM1 shall be legally committed 
to third parties 
by the President or the Vice-President 
or by the signatures of 
two members 
of the staff of 
the EM1 who have been duly authorised 
by the President to sign on 
behalf of 
the EMI. ARTICLE 23 - Liquidation of the EMI 23.1 In accordance with 
Article 1091 of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall go into liquidation 
on the establishment of the 
ECB. All assets 
and liabilities of 
the EM1 shall then pass automatically to the ECB. The latter shall liquidate 
the EM1 according to the 
provisions of this Article. The liquidation 
shall be completed by the beginning of the third stage. 
23.2 The mechanism for 
the creation of ECUs against gold and US dollars as provided for by Article 17 of the EMS Agreement shall be unwound by the first day 
of the third 
stage in accordance with Article 20 of the said Agreement. 
23.3 All claims and liabilities 
arising from 
the very short-term financing mechanism 
and the short-term monetary 
support mechanism, under the Agreements referred to in Article 6.1, shall be settled 
by the first 
day of the third stage. 23.4 All remaining assets of the 
EM1 shall be disposed of and 
all remaining liabilities 
of the 
EM1 shall be settled. 
23.5 The proceeds of 
the liquidation described in Article 23.4 shall be distributed to the national central 
banks in accordance with the key referred to 
in Article 16.2. 23.6 The Council 
of the 
EM1 may take 
the measures necessary for 
the application of Articles 23.4 and 23.5. 23.7 Upon the establishment 
of the ECB, the President of the EM1 shall relinquish his 
office. COMMITTEE OF 
GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE 
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY 
ANNUAL REPORT (July 1990 - December 1991) ISBN 92-9166-201-1 (PRINT), 92-9166-202-X (ONLINE)MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
A. Verplaetse APRIL 1992 Nationale Bank 
van BelgiGlBanque Nationale de Belgique 
E. Hoffmeyer Danmarks Nationalbank H. Schlesinger* Deutsche Bundesbank 
E. Christodoulou** Bank of Greece M. Rubio Banco de 
Espafia J. de Larosi5re Banque de France 
M. Doyle C. Ciampi Central Bank of Ireland Banca d'Italia P. Jaans Institut Monetaire Luxembourgeois W. Duisenberg Nederlandsche Bank J. Tavares Moreira 
R. Leigh-Pemberton Banco de Portugal 
Bank of England A member of the Commission of the 
European Communities 
is invited, as a representative, to the 
meetings of the Committee of Governors. * Replaced K.O. Pbhl with effect from 1st August 1991. 
** Replaced D. Chalikias with effect from 18th February 
1992. TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Pane INTRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT ..................... 1 PART A 
MONETARY ISSVES AhlD THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
. I . ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE OF 
GOVERNORS .......... 1 . Co-ordination of monetary policies 
........... 2 . Monitoring EMS developments .............. 3 . Work related to the move to the final stage of EMU ... 4 . Issues in the 
field of Banking Supervision and payment systems ........................ 5 . Relationships with central banks outside the Community . 6 . Co-operation with 
other Community bodies ........ I1 . ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
AND MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION . . 1 . The economic background to monetary policy 
....... 2 . Monetary and exchange rate developments ........ 3 . Prospects and monetary policy issues .......... I11 . THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES 
OF THE NEW MONETARY INSTITUTIONS 
IN STAGES TWO AND THREE OF ECONOMIC 
AND MONETARY UNION 
.... 1 . The European System 
of Central Banks .......... 2 . The European Monetary Institute 
............ PART B THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS . I . THE CREATION AND THE EVOLVING ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF ......................... GOVERNORS I1 . THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF 
THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS . I . Revised mandate 
of the Committee of Governors ........ I1 . Harmonisation of broad monetary aggregates ......... I11 . The Statute of the European System 
of Central Banks 
and of the European Central 
Bank .................... IV . The Statute of the European Monetary Institute 
....... SUMMARY TABLE : CHART 1 TABLE 1 TABLE 2 TABLE 3 TABLE 4 CHART 2 TABLE 5 TABLE 6 TABLE 7 CHART 3 CHART 4 CHART 5 CHART 6 CHART 7 CHART 8 CHART 9 TABLE 8 CHART 10 Abbreviations and symbols used 
in the Tables and Charts are listed on Pane 
65 Page ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
IN THE COMMUNITY . . . 
. . . . 
. . 
. . . 
. . . . . 
. . . 4 REAL GROWTH AND INFLATION IN THE 
COMMUNITY . . . 
6 DEVELOPMENTS IN REAL GDP 
. . . . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. 18 DEVELOPMENTS IN CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION . . . . 
19 WAGE DEVELOPMENTS (Compensation 
per employee) . . 
22 GENERAL GOVERNMENT BORROWING 
REQUIREMENTS . . . 2 3 
BUDGETARY POSITIONS 
IN THE COMMUNITY . . . 
. . 
. 25 CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCES 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . 
. 26 DEVELOPMENTS IN BROAD MONETARY AGGREGATES 
. . . 
2 8 
MONETARY TARGETS AND 
OUTTURNS . . . . . . . . 
. 29 SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES IN ERM COUNTRIES 
. 31 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
IN INTEREST RATES 
. . . . 
. 3 2 LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES 
IN ERM COUNTRIES 
. . . 
35 EXCHANGE RATES OF THE ECU AGAINST 
THE US 
DOLLAR ANDJAPANESEYEN . . . . 
. . . 
. . . . . . 
. . 
. 3 6 
POSITIONS OF ERM CURRENCIES . . . 
. . . . . . . 38 FORWARD EXCHANGE RATES IN THE 
ERM . . . . . . . 
. 4 0 EXCHANGE RATES 
OF THE GREEK 
DRACHMA AND THE PORTUGUESE ESCUDO . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . 
4 2 ECU FINANCIAL MARKETS 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . 
44 ORGANISATION CHART FOR THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 62 1 Whenever tables and charts provide 
aggregate measures for 
the Community, the ERM and narrow band members, the measures 
are based on countries' participation in 1991. The aggregate measures 
are weighted averages. INTRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT This is the first 
Annual Report of the Committee of Governors on 
its activities and 
on the monetary and financial conditions 
in the Community. The Report 
has been 
prepared in accordance with the Committee's mandate as laid down in the amended Council 
Decision of 
12th March 1990. It covers developments 
during the first one and a 
half years of Stage 
One of Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU), which started on 1st July 1990. Monetary policy co-ordination - the principal 
task of the Committee of Governors The Committee 
of Governors was 
established in 1964 and has 
since then been 
the principal 
forum for co-operation between 
the central banks of 
the EEC Member States. On the entry 
into Stage One of 
EMU the role 
of the 
Committee was considerably strengthened and 
its tasks 
were extended. In particular, additional 
emphasis was placed on the promotion 
of the co-ordination of monetary policies 
with the aim of achieving price stability as 
a necessary condition for 
the proper 
functioning of the European Monetary System (EMS). Although during Stages One and 
Two responsibility for monetary policy remains with 
the national authorities, 
the emphasis on co-ordination in the Committee's mandate reflects the recognition that both 
changes in the economic environment of the Community 
and the objective of creating 
EMU have greatly 
increased the need for compatible monetary 
policies. The gradual realisation 
of a single 
market, in particular the liberalisation 
of capital movements and 
the rapid 
integration of financial markets, 
and the 
enhanced stability of exchange 
rates within the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
(ERM) of the EMS have 
strengthened the interdependence between national 
monetary policies. As a result, the effectiveness of 
monetary policy in Member States is 
becoming increasingly 
dependent upon central bank co-operation. Moreover, the 
agreement to complete EMU within a limited 
number of years has made the 
achievement of a 
high degree of economic 
and financial convergence even more 
urgent. Gearing monetary policies to 
the attainment of 
a stable 
level of prices throughout the Community 
constitutes a crucial element 
in paving the way for 
a successful 
EMU. The co-ordination 
framework Since the start of Stage One further progress 
has been made in co-ordinating monetary policies, 
reflecting the growing consensus on 
the role of monetary 
policy and improvements in the technical aspects 
of the 
co-ordination process. There is a firmly shared conviction in the Community 
that the primary objective of monetary 
policy is to attain 
price stability, as 
a precondition for 
sustainable economic 
growth and social equity. The 
attainment of 
price stability serves as the 
guiding principle for 
the orientation of monetary 
policy in all Community countries 
and the maintenance of price stability 
will be the primary 
objective of monetary policy in full EMU. In order to 
promote this 
common aim, the Committee of Governors has reinforced its efforts 
to improve the co-ordination 
of monetary policies. In particular, as 
a complement 
to the monthly monitoring 
of current conditions 
in financial and foreign exchange markets, 
the Committee 
has introduced 
an annual forward-looking assessment of Member States' monetary policy 
intentions. This 
ex ante assessment has 
the purpose 
of evaluating their mutual 
compatibility before 
final decisions 
on the course 
of monetary policy for the following year 
are taken 
by the national authorities. This exercise is 
followed by regular reviews of the 
outturn in comparison with policy targets to assess the continued appropriateness of 
the stance of national policies in the light of evolving 
developments. In order to base these examinations 
on firmer 
technical grounds, the Committee has begun 
building a 
common analytical framework which uses a system of indicators and common 
assumptions on prospective economic 
developments, and 
which also involves 
the first steps towards improving the 
consistency, to the extent necessary, 
of the 
national definitions of 
broad monetary aggregates. Although still 
in the early stages of 
development, this technical framework has already 
proved valuable. The need 
to strengthen the co-ordination process was heightened by the fact that monetary policies 
have operated in an environment where the authorities' 
commitment to maintain current 
ERM parities has become 
increasingly credible 
to financial market 
participants. This was 
a significant development, given 
events in this period 
which might have 
led to acute 
tensions: the volatility of 
the dollar, the Gulf 
War, developments in Eastern Europe 
and the divergence of 
cyclical positions within 
the Community. Several factors may have 
contributed to the stabilisation 
of exchange rate 
expectations: the political momentum towards 
EMU; the trend towards more convergent inflation rates; 
the narrowing of current-account 
imbalances; and 
a long 
period without a general realignment, reflecting 
the pursuit of 
a "hard currency option" as a means of implementing 
anti-inflationary monetary 
policies. As exchange rate expectations 
became more stable, 
there was a narrowing of 
interest rate differentials 
between Community currencies. As a result, the financial linkages 
within the Community were reinforced and 
the room for independent national 
monetary policies was further restricted. The co-ordinated setting of monetary policies 
for 1991 In the first 
ex ante assessment of the 
orientation of national monetary policies for 1991, 
the Committee of 
Governors agreed 
that the stance of national 
policies should remain geared towards a further 
reduction of inflationary pressures. 
This assessment took into account 
the less favourable growth 
prospects in many Community 
countries, the 
potential repercussions of German unification, and 
the uncertainties in the international environment 
associated with the conflict 
in the Gulf. The execution of monetary policy was broadly in line with the intentions. Most Member States 
registered a 
slowdown in monetary growth, generally meeting 
the quantified targets where 
these were set. At the same time, interest 
rate differentials narrowed markedly, 
with rates converging towards 
the German level, 
which even though increasing 
during the year, remained the lowest in the Community. While monetary policies 
were in line with the course endorsed by the Committee of Governors, results in 1991 were 
mixed (see 
Summary Table). Although for the Community as a whole the rate of inflation - measured in terms of the weighted 
consumer price 
index - declined from 5.7% in 1990 to 5.1% in 1991, with some narrowing 
in inflation differentials, 
this outcome 
is still far 
from the final goal of price stability. 
Moreover, not 
only was inflation in 1991 appreciably higher than 
the average rate 
achieved over 
the 1986 to 1988 
period, but the result 
was also disappointing 
in the light 
of less inflationary external conditions and 
weaker economic activity 
within the Community than had 
been anticipated 
at the time when monetary jUMMARY TABLE: ECONOMIC AND 
FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS IN THE COMMUNITY a) Source: BIS and 
National Data REAL GDP CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION COMPENSATION PER EMPLOYEE CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE 
C) GENERAL GOVERNMENT 
BORROWING REQUIREMENT SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE 
d) LONG-TERM INTEREST RATE 
e) a) All figures are EEC weighted averages. 
b) Estimates c) A negative 
number indicates a deficit. d) 3-month domestic money 
market rate. e) Long-term government 
or public sector bond rate. 1986-88 average 1989 percentage change 
over the previous year 1990 3.2 3.6 6.1 1991 b) 3.6 5.3 6.2 per cent of nominal GDP/GNP 2.8 5.7 7.5 0.8 4.0 1.1 5.1 7.1 0.0 2.9 per cent -0.2 4.5 8.7 9.2 -0.9 4.3 10.9 9.9 11.6 
11.2 10.9 10.3 policy intentions were formulated (see Chart 
1). In addition, the decline 
in the average rate 
of price increase for 
the Community as a whole was largely a reflection of a substantial 
fall in inflation in the United Kingdom, while 
other countries 
with high inflation 
in 1990 made only limited progress. 
Furthermore, inflation rose 
in Germany and the Netherlands, the two Member 
States with traditionally the lowest rates. 
However, some 
countries succeeded 
in maintaining relatively low rates of inflation. The growing 
confidence in the prevailing exchange rate 
parities was beneficial for business decisions and contributed 
to stable conditions 
in financial 
markets. It also allowed countries 
with sluggish economic activity and 
low or rapidly 
falling rates 
of inflation to reduce interest 
rates in the first 
half of 1991 towards German levels. However, there were 
limits on the extent 
to which interest rates 
could be 
lowered without 
creating exchange rate 
tensions. This became evident 
in the second half 
of 1991, after interest 
rate differentials 
within the Community 
had narrowed to historically 
low levels. At the 
end of 
1991, interest rates 
had to be raised in a number of countries to signal the commitment to 
maintaining exchange rate 
stability. Constraints 
on the scope 
for independent interest 
rate changes have also 
been faced 
by countries experiencing strong inflationary pressures, 
making it difficult to keep interest rates 
at levels considered 
high enough to fight inflation. The importance of appropriate fiscal 
policies and waae developments Both the 
resilience of inflation and the conflict 
sometimes experienced between 
the objective 
of exchange rate stability 
and domestic 
considerations highlight 
the importance 
of other factors which affect price performance, notably fiscal 
policies and wage developments. Budget deficits remained excessively high in a number of 
Member States 
in 1991. Indeed, the weighted average 
of general government borrowing 
requirements in the Community rose 
sharply in 1990, despite the fact that 
low deficits were 
maintained in several countries. 
Plans for 
budgetary consolidation in 1991 were seldom fully met, 
and as a result the 
average deficit 
remained well above 4% of GDP. 
As recent experience has 
shown, fiscal imbalances 
are not just a matter of national concern. Changes in demand and 
interest rates 
generated by excessively expansionary 
national fiscal policies 
may affect economic and financial conditions throughout 
the Community 
and complicate the task of monetary policy in pursuing price stability. 
Large budget deficits within the Community have contributed to 
high real interest 
rates, which have 
dampened private investment and have reduced long-run growth potential. Concerns also apply to labour market developments. Nominal 
wages have continued 
to grow rapidly in the Community 
in 1991, 
increasing on 
average by more than 
7%, in spite of generally weaker demand conditions 
and rising unemployment. In this situation the co-ordination of monetary policies is not sufficient on its own to bring about price 
stability. If more significant progress is to be achieved in fighting inflation 
and creating a 
greater degree of economic and financial 
convergence, the national authorities 
will not only have to rein back fiscal deficits where 
they are excessive, but strong efforts should 
also be made to 
contain wage 
pressures. While these considerations apply to 
all Member 
States, they are particularly important in those which play a pivotal role in shaping the economic and financial conditions 
in the Community. Lessons for 
1992 The experience 
of the first eighteen months 
of Stage One 
was a valuable element in the assessment of the appropriate course 
of monetary policy in 1992. When reviewing national policy intentions and targets for 
the current year, the Committee of Governors was in 
full agreement 
that the thrust of the overall stance 
should be 
to promote 
a further decline in 
inflation in the Community. The monetary policies envisaged 
by the national authorities were 
considered to 
be consistent with this aim and should provide a significant anti-inflationary impetus. However, this appraisal 
was contingent upon the assumption that 
the fiscal consolidation 
and the 
moderation in labour cost pressures expected 
in 1992 would indeed be realised. The fulfilment 
of these expectations is crucial since the 
effectiveness of monetary policies in delivering a stable 
price level in the Community is heavily dependent 
upon adequate support 
from fiscal and other policies 
- especially given 
the desire to safeguard exchange rate stability within the Community 
and the more limited 
room for countries 
to set interest rates 
with a view to domestic economic conditions. 
Indeed, there is an urgent need in many Community 
countries to contain 
cost pressures arising from 
excessive wage 
claims, to adjust 
the policy 
mix by reducing fiscal 
deficits and to 
implement supply-side measures in 
order to render market forces more 
effective. Determined efforts in these fields 
are not only crucial 
if further 
progress towards price stability and a 
resumption of sustainable 
economic growth 
are to 
be achieved in 1992, but also to promote the degree 
of economic convergence which is necessary to 
underpin the 
existing ERM central parities 
in the longer run and to demonstrate the resolve to meet 
the conditions 
for entry into Stage Three 
of EMU. The first part of the Report focuses on the work of the Committee of Governors. In the first Chapter 
the activities of 
the Committee are described in greater detail. The second 
Chapter reviews the 
financial and monetary developments 
in the Community 
since the beginning of Stage One 
of EMU. The third Chapter outlines the main features 
of the new monetary institutions to 
be established in accordance with the Treaty on European Union. The second part of 
the Report provides 
an overview of the structure and organisation of 
the Committee of 
Governors. PART A MOhETARY ISSUES AND THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
I. ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS Since the 
beginning of Stage One, the Committee of Governors has 
taken further 
steps to strengthen the co-ordination 
of monetary policies. In addition, the Committee has focused 
on: the monitoring of developments 
in the European Monetary System 
(EMS); the institutional requirements 
for the second and third stages 
of EMU; issues in the field of banking 
supervision and 
payment systems; and relationships with non-Community countries. The Committee 
was assisted by the Committee of Alternates, the sub-committees and working groups, 
and the 
Secretariat and Economic Unit (see Part B of the 
Report). 1. CO-ORDINATION OF MONETARY POLICIES 
The Committee 
of Governors has strengthened 
its efforts to promote the co-ordination 
of monetary policies, in accordance with its revised mandate of March 1990 (see Annex I). To this end, it has 
established a common 
framework for the 
monitoring of monetary policies, which includes regular examinations 
based on a set of commonly agreed 
and mutually consistent 
indicators. Particular emphasis has been 
placed on the enhancement 
of the forward-looking analysis 
of economic and monetary trends 
in the Community. 
Each autumn, before the final decisions 
by the national authorities, 
the Committee assesses 
the national monetary 
policy intentions for the following year. This "ex anten exercise involves, in particular, an appraisal of whether the intended 
intermediate objectives of national 
monetary policies are mutually compatible and consistent 
with the objective of downward convergence 
of inflation rates throughout the Community, taking into account 
the desire to preserve exchange rate stability. 
The forward-looking 
assessments are supplemented by "ex post" surveillance exercises in which developments 
in economic and monetary 
indicators are compared with earlier projections. 
The causes 
of deviations are examined as well as the need and scope for corrective measures. 
In addition, the Committee 
of Governors has continued its practice of 
studying in detail, once a year, developments in public finance and their 
implications for the conduct of monetary policies. 
The anten and "ex post" exercises make use 
of a set of commonly agreed indicators 
and, in addition, allow each central 
bank to take into account the assessment of the other Community central banks. To ensure the broad consistency of the national projections, 
the forward-looking appraisal 
is now based on a common set 
of assumptions on economic and financial 
prospects outside 
the Community. Attention is also being devoted to the development of Community-wide economic indicators, 
to an evaluation of 
the comparability of monetary statistics, and to 
improvements in the analytical framework for 
interpreting monetary aggregates and their 
domestic and foreign counterparts. In the latter respects, a first 
step towards improving 
the consistency of the definitions 
of broad money stocks has 
been made, paying due regard 
to differences in national financial 
structures and behaviour 
and to 
the need to maintain a 
stable relationship 
between national 
monetary aggregates and the final goals of monetary policy (see Annex 11). Some of the Member States have already 
decided to adopt the revised definitions. 
2. MONITORING EMS DEVELOPMENTS 
One of the main tasks of the Committee of Governors 
is to oversee the operation of 
the EMS. This activity includes 
the joint monitoring of current exchange 
rate and monetary policy 
developments, as 
well as the examination of all the other factors 
affecting the 
functioning of the EMS exchange rate 
mechanism. The monitoring follows a 
procedure which was established by the so-called BaslelNyborg agreement of 1987. Each month, exchange rate 
trends are examined and instruments 
used to counteract exchange market 
tensions are reviewed. This review takes account 
of economic developments and the agreement that the available 
instruments to reduce tension (intervention, 
exchange rate movements 
within the band and interest rate changes) 
should be used flexibly and concertedly to promote intra-ERM exchange rate stability. Following the move 
to Stage One 
of EMU, the Committee of Governors has 
supplemented the monthly 
monitoring exercise 
with an annual examination of the 
functioning of the EMS. The first 
examination of this kind took 
place in December 1991 and covered all 
aspects of EMS operations, 
as well as current and prospective policy issues. - 12 - Developments in the use of the private 
ECU have been monitored on 
an annual basis since 1984. 
These examinations include 
assessments of the monetary implications of the growing financial use 
of the ECU, the compatibility of measures taken 
by national and Community authorities and the significance of legal and administrative obstacles to the use of the private ECU. The importance 
of these examinations has increased given 
the rapid expansion of the market (see Chapter 
11, section 2.5) and the 
transformation of the 
present ECU basket 
into the single currency in Stage Three of 
EMU. 3. WORK RELATED TO THE MOVE 
TO THE FINAL STAGE OF 
EMU In June 1989, at its meeting 
in Madrid, the European Council asked the competent 
bodies of the 
Community, including the Committee of Governors, to carry out the preparatory work for the 
organisation of an Intergovernmental Conference to lay down the subsequent stages 
of EMU. In accordance with this mandate, the Committee of Governors submitted to the Intergovernmental Conference on EMU, on 27th November 1990, its proposal 
for a Statute of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) 
and of the 
European Central 
Bank (ECB). In the course of the Intergovernmental Conference, the Committee 
of Governors added provisions covering more 
technical aspects, as well as for 
the arrangements for the transition to 
the final stage of EMU. Furthermore, on 30th October 1991, the Committee of Governors submitted its proposal 
for the Statute of the European Monetary 
Institute (EMI). In addition to this 
preparatory work, the Committee of Governors followed the developments 
at the 
Intergovernmental Conference closely and provided advice in the areas of its competence. 
In accordance with the consultation procedure foreseen in Article 
102 A 
of the EC Treaty, in November 1991, the Committee expressed 
its opinion on the Dutch Presidency's proposal for a Treaty on EMU. The Committee 
of Governors has noted with satisfaction that its preparatory work was well received by the Intergovernmental Conference and that the texts agreed 
upon by the Heads of State 
or of Government in Maastricht in December 1991 reflected closely 
the proposals of the 
Committee (see Chapter 
111). 4. ISSUES IN THE FIELD OF BANKING SUPERVISION AND 
PAYMENT SYSTEMS The revised mandate 
requires the 
Committee of Governors to hold consultations on those issues affecting the 
stability of financial institutions and markets 
which fall within the competence of the central banks. In this context, the Committee 
has examined certain issues 
arising in the field of 
banking supervision and payment 
systems. In the banking supervisory 
field, the Committee 
of Governors has considered a range 
of institution-specific aspects. In particular, the closure of BCCI 
has led the Committee 
to review the implications of this case for 
international banking supervision in conjunction with the competent supervisory 
bodies. In addition, work centred on two major topics. The first concerned the supervision of conglomerates containing a 
bank. In particular, the possible lack of transparency of a 
group's structure and operations can make it 
difficult for 
supervisors to 
take a group-wide 
financial view. This is particularly important given 
the possible risks 
of contagion from problems arising in one part of a conglomerate. A need 
was identified for banking supervisors to 
have discussions with other regulators, especially with those supervising insurance and securities 
markets. The other main theme has been 
the definition of a common 
understanding on the application 
of the Second Banking 
Co-ordination Directive, which 
is due to come into force on 1st January 1993. Before 
this date, a number 
of practical problems need to be resolved. These concern 
the respective future responsibilities of supervisors both in the countries where banking institutions are 
operating and in those where their head 
office is located. 
In this context, valuable technical assistance 
has been 
provided by the "Groupe de Contact" an informal group of 
senior EEC 
banking supervisors. 
In the area of pawlent systems, a number 
of aspects have 
been studied by the Committee of Governors; part of this work is 
currently being prepared by a working group 
which has been 
established on an ad hoc basis. The first 
issue concerns the 
design and operation 
of the ECU Clearing and Settlement 
System, in particular the 
question of whether current procedures 
satisfy the minimum 
standards laid down as a result of the G-10 work on interbank netting schemes. Prior to their 
implementation, the Committee of 
Governors examined the 
intermediation facilities 
provided by the BIS and 
by some national central banks to 
ensure a smooth operation 
of the 
daily clearing. The second aspect relates to the development of payment systems in the context of the 
Single Market and against the 
background of EMU. Work currently being performed is essentially of 
an exploratory nature and 
the Committee of Governors expects to draw some preliminary 
conclusions in the next few months. In addition, the Committee of Governors 
expressed its views on 
the Commission's Discussion Paper "Making Payments in the Internal Market" 
(COM(90)447). Further discussions are now taking place in the Commission's Consultative Group 
on which the Committee of Governors 
is represented by delegates from national central banks. RELATIONSHIPS WITH CENTRAL 
BANKS OUTSIDE THE COMMUNITY 
The Committee 
of Governors 
has continued 
to promote the co-operation with respect to 
developments in exchange markets 
between Community central 
banks and 
the central banks of the 
United States, Canada, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, 
Austria and Switzerland. This co-operation 
provides an important channel of 
information and concerns the pooling of 
data on exchange market developments, intervention and other 
official foreign exchange 
transactions in the so-called "concertation 
proceduren. Moreover, the 
Committee of 
Governors has continued the arrangements with Norges Bank agreed 
in 1984, which provide for regular 
consultations on matters of common interest. In December 1990, following 
the decision taken by the Norwegian authorities to 
peg their currency to 
the ECU, the 
Community central banks agreed 
to extend the bilateral 
co-operation with Norges Bank and concluded bilateral 
swap agreements 
governed by uniform conditions. These 
swap agreements, 
which were renewed at their maturity on 31st December 1991, give Norges Bank 
access to short-term funds for 
intervention purposes 
up to 
the equivalent 
of ECU 2 billion. 
A number of countries outside 
the EMS have established unilateral 
links with the ECU since the start of 
Stage One. Norway (as from 22nd October 1990). Sweden (17th May 1991) and Finland (7th June 
1991) unilaterally pegged their currencies 
to the ECU. With the Austrian Schilling pegged to the Deutsche Mark for many 
years, the move by the three Scandinavian countries 
extended further the 
zone of stable exchange 
rate parities in Europe. 6. CO-OPERATION WITH 
OTHER COMMUNITY BODIES 
In the performance of its tasks and 
functions, the Committee of Governors has 
collaborated with other Community bodies. 
Firstly, the Chairman of the Committee of Governors has attended the Council 
meetings devoted to the multilateral surveillance of member countries' economic policies and 
expressed the 
Committee's views on the consistency 
between monetary and other economic 
policies. In addition, the Governors participated in the informal ECOFIN Council meetings. 
Secondly, the Chairman was invited in March 1991 to attend a meeting of the European Parliament Committee 
on economic and monetary matters and industrial policy. The Chairman informed 
the Committee of the Governors' work on the Statute of the ESCB and 
of the ECB 
as well as on the measures taken 
to strengthen monetary 
policy co-ordination. Thirdly, close co-operation 
with the Commission of the European Communities has continued. Commission representatives attended the meetings of the Committee of Governors and of the Committee 
of Alternates, as well as most of the meetings 
of the sub-committees 
and working groups. Fourthly, the Committee of Governors has contributed to the 
work of the Committee 
on monetary, financial and balance-of-payments statistics which was created by a Council Decision 
in February 1991. A member of the Secretariat has permanent observer status 
on this Committee, whose work 
aims at improving the consistency of statistical data. 
Finally, the Committee of Governors has closely followed 
the work of the Monetary Committee. 
Links with this Committee are 
ensured by the central bank representatives, who 
in most cases are the Alternates 
of the 
Governors. 11. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
AND MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION 
1. THE ECONOMIC BACKGROUND TO MONETARY POLICY 
After the 
strong upswing in the late 1980s, economic growth in the Community as a 
whole has slowed down sharply over 
the last 
two years. However, there have 
been marked differences 
in the experience of individual 
countries. Whereas economic conditions 
in western Germany 
remained buoyant, growth decelerated 
elsewhere in the Community (see Table 
1). Nevertheless, inflation, which had risen in most countries in the period of rapid demand 
growth, is 
proving hard 
to eradicate (see 
Table 2). During 1991, the average inflation rate 
in the Community fell, although 
in many countries 
the decline was quite modest, 
and in some traditionally low-inflation 
countries inflation 
quickened. Economic 
conditions in the rest of the 
world, as well as German unification 
and other factors internal to 
the Community, account for 
these developments. 
1.1 External environment Since the middle 
of 1990, world 
economic activity has weakened 
more sharply than first expected, 
thus reducing 
the demand for 
Community exports and dampening growth in 
the Community. As private sector confidence 
was dented by the Gulf crisis, 
the United States 
economy slipped into recession in late 1990 and early 1991. Signs of a 
subsequent turnaround have been uneven 
and fragile: indications of some 
improvement have often 
been shortly followed 
by other signals suggesting protracted 
weakness. The 
resulting uncertainty 
surrounding prospects 
for US monetary policy and 
expected interest rate differentials against 
other major currencies 
triggered sharp swings in the dollar exchange rate. In the event, slow 
monetary growth, 
as well as other signs that inflationary pressures 
were abating, led the Federal Reserve to ease monetary 
policy on a number of occasions throughout 
the period, 
reducing short-term interest rates to 
the present low level. Elsewhere, the economic cycle in Japan lagged behind 
that of the North American 
economies and has been less pronounced, while 
in EFTA markets, 
which account for 
a greater proportion 
of Community exports than the United States 
and Japan combined, 
demand conditions have been 
subdued. Eastern Europe accounts 
for only 
a small share 
of Community countries' trade at present, and hence the reform 
process and the 
problems of the 
former USSR have 
had relatively little 
direct economic impact 
on the TABLE 1: DEVELOPMENTS IN REAL GDP 
Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: 
OECD a) Estimates b) GNP TABLE 2: DEVELOPMENTS IN CONSUMER PRICE 
INFLATION Source: BIS; National Data Belgium Denmark Germany (western) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal 
United Kingdom EEC : average ERM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States Japan 12 months Dec.90 3.5 1.9 2.8 22.8 6.5 3.4 2.7 6.6 4.4 2.7 13.7 9.3 5.8 5.3 4.0 6.1 3.8 percentage change over 
the to Dec.91 2.8 2.3 4.2 17.8 5.5 3.1 3.6 
6.1 2.6 4.9 9.6 
4.5 4.8 4.5 4.3 3.1 
2.7 1986-88 average 1.3 4.1 0.5 17.7 6.3 2.8 3.0 
5.2 0.6 0.0 10.3 4.2 3.6 3.2 2.5 3.2 0.5 previous 1989 3.1 4.8 2.8 13.7 6.8 3.6 4.0 6.3 3.4 1.1 12.6 7.8 5.3 5.0 3.9 4.8 2.3 year 1990 3.5 2.6 2.7 20.4 6.7 3.4 3.4 6.5 3.7 2.5 13.4 9.5 5.7 5.3 3.9 5.4 3.1 - 1991 3.2 2.4 
3.5 18.9 5.9 3.1 3.2 
6.4 3.1 3.9 11.4 5.9 5.1 4.7 4.2 4.3 3.3 Community. However, given 
the geo-political ties between the 
regions and 
prospects of growing 
economic integration, Community 
financial markets have 
from time to time been 
affected by developments in the eastern 
bloc. The slowdown in the world 
economy has contributed to a reduction in global inflation. Non-oil commodity prices fell sharply 
in the second half of 
1990 to their lowest level for 
around three 
years and remained 
subdued through 1991. The oil 
price hike in the autumn of 
1990 was short-lived, and 
in 1991 the average dollar price 
was only a little higher 
than the level 
preceding the Gulf crisis. Furthermore, profit margins 
on traded manufactured goods have 
been squeezed, as companies have 
tried to maintain market 
shares on both domestic and export 
markets. Weak 
world trade prices have 
helped to moderate inflation 
in the Community. 1.2 German unification The unification 
of Germany 
in the second half of 1990 has had a 
profound economic impact, not 
only in Germany, but also in the rest 
of the Community. Unification has given 
rise to a large fiscal expansion to 
support incomes and 
to encourage investment 
in eastern Germany during 
the difficult adjustment period. Output in eastern Germany has plummeted, although 
tentative signs have recently emerged that a 
pick-up is 
underway. Despite the collapse in domestic production, eastern German demand rose 
sharply following unification, 
financed largely 
by government transfers. This surge in demand came 
at a time 
when the western German 
economy was already operating at a high level 
of capacity. Consequently, the 
stimulus not only boosted output in Germany but also supported activity in other Member States. The surge in demand led to a sharp 
increase in German imports 
and a 
diversion of exports 
in 1990 and the first half of 
1991 and, as 
a result, all Community countries have 
improved their bilateral 
trade position with 
Germany, in some cases by well over 1% of GDP. 
At the same 
time, the strong 
demand in Germany fuelled 
domestic inflationary pressures. 
These pressures have been countered 
by a series 
of increases in interest rates, which have 
also affected interest rate 
conditions elsewhere 
in the Community. 
1.3 Economic performance and 
nominal convernence in the Community In spite of the surge 
in output in western Germany, the 
cyclical downturn in the Community as a whole has proved sharper than foreseen in mid-1990. This reflected the marked slowdown in external markets and weaker 
domestic spending, as real 
interest rates remained 
high and private sector 
confidence recovered 
only slowly after the 
Gulf War. Following six years 
of relatively strong growth, real GDP 
in the Community increased by only 1.1% in 1991, the lowest rate 
since 1982. As activity weakened, unemployment 
in the Community began to 
rise. Developments at the 
aggregate level mask 
an increased cyclical 
divergence between the individual Member 
States. Although growth weakened 
through 1991, the level 
of economic 
activity in western Germany has 
remained high, in marked contrast 
to the recession experienced in the United Kingdom. 
In the other 
countries, growth has 
slowed sharply, although 
it remained above 2% in Spain, Luxembourg and Portugal. The only exception 
to the 
slowdown was Greece where 
economic activity recovered 
marginally. Since the 
start of Stage One, 
the average rate 
of inflation and 
the dispersion across 
countries have narrowed modestly. 
For 1991 as a whole, consumer price inflation in the Community 
on a weighted basis fell only to around 5%, well 
above the 
rates of under 
4% experienced in the period from 1986 to 1988. 
Although external influences and the slowdown in economic activity have 
generally been 
conducive to inflation reduction, 
persistently strong growth 
in wages and inadequate fiscal consolidation in 
many countries hindered more 
significant progress (see 
Tables 3 and 4). In addition, structural rigidities, including insufficient flexibility 
in labour markets, continue to hamper the disinflationary 
process. In the high-inflation countries, the 
rate of increase of prices 
was much lower in sectors open to foreign 
competition than in the more sheltered parts of the 
economy. The convergence 
of price performance in the Community has 
been partly of 
the wrong 
kind, as inflation 
rates have risen significantly 
in Germany and 
the Netherlands, the Community countries with the best historical record in terms of 
price stability. This 
deterioration reflected a marked 
pick-up in wage settlements as well 
as increases in taxes and 
other public sector prices. 
With the exception of Italy, where 
the average rate of price increase 
in 1991 was 
essentially unchanged, the other 
Community countries 
succeeded in lowering inflation in 1991, although to 
varying extents. In the five countries (Belgium, Denmark, France, 
Ireland and Luxembourg) which, 
together with Germany and the Netherlands, 
had relatively low rates of inflation in 1990, the improvement was limited to a maximum of 0.5 percentage point and 
in most cases 
was less. Denmark had 
the TABLE 3: WAGE DEVELOPMENTS 
(Compensation per Employee) a) Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: OECD Belgium Denmark Germany (western) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom EEC : average EM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States c) Japan c) a) Whole economy; increase in nominal 
terms. b) Estimates 
c) Data covers the business sector 
only, and may thus not 
be directly comparable 
with the data for the 
EEC countries. previous year 1991 b) 5.4 3.2 6.2 16.1 8.7 4.7 7.0 8.3 4.7 4.4 17.8 8.2 7.1 6.8 6.1 4.0 3.8 percentage 1986-88 average 2.9 5.7 3.2 13.9 7.7 4.6 5.4 8.2 3.7 2.2 17.6 8.2 6.1 5.8 4.9 4.3 3.2 change 1989 3.6 3.8 3.0 17.8 6.3 
4.6 6.5 8.7 6.5 0.8 16.4 9.1 6.2 5.9 4.9 2.9 3.9 over the 
1990 5.9 3.4 4.7 20.0 7.9 5.4 3.8 10.4 5.2 3.3 18.4 9.7 7.5 7.1 6.3 3.8 4.5 TABLE 4: GENERAL GOVERNMENT BORROWING REQUIREMENTS a) a) Negative numbers indicate a 
fiscal surplus. 
b) Estimates c) Up to 1989 western Germany only; 
1990 on the basis of all German borrowing requirement over 
western German GDP; 1991 on the basis of figures of all 
Germany. lowest rate of inflation 
in 1991 at 
2.4%. Elsewhere, against 
a background 
of weak economic activity, inflation fell 
dramatically in the United Kingdom following 
sterling's entry into the ERM; in Spain, the rate declined steadily, 
but only slowly; and in Greece and Portugal, average inflation in 1991 dropped by between 1 and 2 percentage points, although 
a much sharper decline 
was recorded through the year. The trend towards a 
gradual reduction in fiscal deficits 
in the late 1980s 
has been reversed in the past two 
years in some countries. Although the deficit 
remained low in several countries, the combined 
deficit at the general 
government level rose 
from around 3% of Community 
GDP in 1989 to some 4.5% in 1990, and remained 
near that level 
in 1991. The deterioration in budgetary performance can be attributed to several factors: German unification; 
the slowdown in economic growth; and, in some countries, to slippage in the control of government spending. 
Differences in the budgetary positions of Member States 
remain substantial 
(see Chart 2). While five 
countries had general government 
deficits under 3% of GDP in 1991, at the other end of 
the spectrum the 
deficit was around 10% in Italy, and around 
15% in 
Greece. The levels 
of public sector 
debt diverge markedly and 
in three Community countries 
remain above 
100% of GDP. Current-account imbalances in Germany and the 
United Kingdom have 
narrowed markedly 
over the past 
two years (see Table 5). In Germany, the fiscal expansion 
associated with unification has 
absorbed the previously 
large national 
savings surplus, with the 
current account moving from a surplus of almost 
5% of GDP in 1989 to a deficit of over 
1% in 1991. In the United Kingdom, the 
recovery of personal sector savings 
and the 
cutback in corporate investment have 
been reflected 
in a marked decline 
in the current-account deficit. In Greece the deficit fell 
from over 5% of GDP in 
1990 to 2% in 1991. Elsewhere in the Community, a sizable current-account deficit persisted 
in Spain, financed by substantial long-term 
capital inflows attracted by profitable investment opportunities. 
The Netherlands has continued to 
record a large current-account surplus. 
2. MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE 
DEVELOPMENTS In Stage One, although the responsibility for monetary 
policy remains at the national level, the liberalisation of 
capital flows 
and b) General Government 
Borrowing Requirement, 1991 (National Sources) CHART 2: BUDGETARY POSITIONS IN THE 
COMMUNITY (per cent of nominal GDPIGNP) 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 20° PUBLIC 1 40 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 a) Gross Debt 
of General Government, end of 1990 (Commission Sources) BUDGET DEFICIT 
b) DEBT a) - - BE - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - LU . 1 I -5 0 5 10 15 I I I TABLE 5: CURRENT ACCOUNT OF THE BALANCE OF 
PAYMENTS a) Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: OECD Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Germany c) d) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom EEC : average ERM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States c) Japan c) a) Negative numbers indicate a deficit 
b) Estimates c) In per cent of nominal GNP d) Up to June 
1990 western Germany 
only. per 1986-88 average 2.3 -3.2 4.3 -2.9 0.3 -0.2 0.2 -0.1 2.3 
0.9 -1.7 0.8 0.8 1.5 -3.2 3.5 cent of 1989 2.3 -1.1 4.8 -4.7 -2.9 -0.5 1.5 -1.2 3.8 0.4 -4.7 0.0 0.1 1.5 -2.0 2.0 nominal GDP 1990 1.9 1.1 3.1 -5.4 -3.4 -0.7 3.4 -1.3 3.9 -0.1 -3.2 -0.2 -0.1 0.9 -1.7 1.2 1991 b) 
2.0 1.7 -1.2 -2.1 -3.0 -0.5 4.8 -1.7 3.9 -1.1 -1.2 -0.9 -0.8 -0.5 -0.1 2.1 rapid financial integration have 
strengthened the interdependence between national policies 
in the context of the ERM. Most indicators suggest that 
monetary policies have been firm since the start of Stage One and have 
thus generally favoured 
progress towards lower 
inflation in an 
environment of stable exchange rates 
between Community currencies. 
However, in many Member 
States wage and fiscal 
developments have not 
provided sufficient support 
to monetary policy. 2.1 The stance of monetary ~olicy Due to the long and variable lags in the transmission of monetary policy, the monetary 
stance must 
be appraised on the basis of 
medium-run trends. Developments in monetary aggregates and interest rates 
provide useful evidence for this assessment. 
Monetary amregates Growth rates 
of the 
key broad monetary aggregates have 
moderated in most countries over the last 
two years (see 
Table 6). A deceleration is also evident in the broad monetary aggregates which 
have been harmonised 
for the internal use 
of the Committee of 
Governors (see Annex 11). The slowdown in monetary growth, although 
partly reflecting the weakening in 
economic activity, indicates that monetary policies tended 
to exert downward pressure on inflation. In the countries 
which announce targets, monetary growth has 
generally been 
within or close to the published ranges over 
this period 
(see Table 
7). However, in Germany, monetary growth accelerated 
in late 1991, fuelled by buoyant credit 
demand, and as a 
result the target was 
exceeded. In Spain, the overshooting in 1991 partly reflected capital inflows. In an environment of stable exchange rate 
expectations and 
liberalised capital movements, 
these inflows ultimately 
stemmed from the substantial government 
borrowing requirement. 
A similar mechanism 
led to an overshooting in Italy in 1990 and Portugal 
in 1991. Furthermore, shifts in portfolio behaviour, often 
related to financial deregulation and innovation 
or to changes 
in taxation, partly accounted for deviations 
from targets in both directions, 
as experienced in Greece, Spain, France and 
Italy. The 
avoidance of distortions from financial 
shifts was one 
of the important factors behind the revisions in the national definitions 
of broad money in 
several countries. 
TABLE 6: DEVELOPMENTS IN BROAD MONETARY AGGREGATES a) Source: BIS and National 
Data Belgium Denmark Germany b ) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom United States Japan a) National definitions of broad money stocks 
are not suffi- 
ciently similar to be aggregated at the Community 
level (see Annex 11). The following aggregates have been selected: 
Belgium: M4e; Denmark: M National; Germany: M3; Greece: M3; Spain: (new) ALP; France: (new) M3; Ireland: M3; Italy: M2; Netherlands: M3; Portugal: L-; United Kingdom: M4; United States: M2; Japan: M2tCD. b) Up to 
1990, western Germany only. 
4th quarter/4th 1986-88 average 9.8 5.9 6.7 22.4 14.2 8.4 4.8 9.1 4.8 20.3 16.5 6.2 10.2 quarter 1989 10.5 4.3 4.7 23.8 15.3 9.1 4.6 8.8 13.0 7.7 18.9 4.7 10.5 percentage 1990 6.9 8.1 5.6 15.1 
10.4 8.1 16.7 9.9 6.8 16.0 12.1 3.8 9.2 change 1991 7.3 5.7 5.2 7.2 11.3 4.1 5.2 8.3 
5.8 15.0 5.5 2.7 3.1 TABLE 7. MONETARY TARGETS AND OUTTURNS a) A. Countries setting targets for 
money supply 
growth Target 1990 1991 1992 Variable Target Outturn Target outturn Target Germany M3 4-6 5.6 3-5 b) 5.2 3.5-5.5 Greece M3 19-21 14.2 14-16 11.7 
(8.3) e) 9-12 d) Spain M 3 
- - - 7-11 d) ALP 6.5-9.5 11.3 7-11 12.1 (10.9) e) 8-11 d) France M2 3.5-5.5 -0.5 
- - - M3 - - 5-7 d) 4.1 4-6 Italy M2 6-9 9.9 5-8 8.9 5-7 d) Portugal M 3 
- - - - 12-15 d) L - - 11.5 12 15.2 12-16 United Kingdom MO 1-5 2.5 0-4 2.8 December c) - B. Countries setting targets for the domestic source 
of money supply growth r--' Target 1990 1991 1992 Variable Target Outturn Target outturn Target Denmark DMC f) - -0.9 4-7 1.3 4-7 Netherlands Bank's DMC 
f) 6 6 7-8 11.0 7-8 Source: National Data "-" target not set 
a) Targets are set for 
a calendar year (4th 
qrt./4th qrt. or Dec./Dec.) except in the 
UK (March/March). The 1990 and 1991 outturn columns report the corresponding 
growth rate of the respective 
variable. No monetary 
target is set in 
Belgium, Ireland and Luxembourg. b) Revised from 
4-6% at the mid-year target review. 
c) Annualised percentage change 
between the 
base period and 
the last month. 
d) Target refers to a revised definition of the aggregate. e) Figures in 
parentheses show the 1991 
outturn for the revised definition to be used in 1992. f) Domestic money creation 
(Denmark: growth in 
"Lending to residents in domestic currency + Stock of bonds denominated in domestic currency 
- Special deposits". Netherlands: growth in "Lending 
to domestic private 
sector + long-term lending to domestic government 
- domestic non-monetary liabilities"). Interest rates 
In the two years 
prior to Stage One, there had 
been a significant tightening of monetary 
policies in the Community 
to counter the revival 
of inflationary pressure stemming 
from rapid demand growth. 
Through 1988 and 1989, three-month nominal 
interest rates rose 
on average by around 3 percentage points, 
with particularly strong 
increases in the United Kingdom and Spain, where 
the overheating 
of the economy was most pronounced (see Chart 3). The rise 
in short-term rates 
in this period exceeded 
the increase in inflation. In the countries whose currencies participate 
in the narrow 
band of the ERM, short-term rates have remained rather high subsequently. Indeed, in Germany and the Netherlands rates 
have risen 
significantly over 
the eighteen months under 
review. In the other narrow-band members, 
rates in late 1991 had returned to their mid-1990 levels, although 
there had been 
some broadly offsetting swings 
in interest rates during the interim 
(see Chart 4). At the end of 1990, a general upward 
movement in short-term interest rates 
was triggered by concerns about unfavourable 
price movements, arising 
partly from the oil price hike in connection with the Gulf crisis, 
but also from adverse wage developments and widening 
budget deficits, especially in Germany. With oil prices 
returning quickly to 
the pre-Gulf levels 
in early 1991, most 
Community countries sought to 
lower short-term interest rates, although rates 
remained broadly unchanged 
in Germany and the Netherlands, as 
strong inflationary pressures continued. 
In the other countries 
participating in the narrow band, inflationary 
forces were receding and growth 
prospects deteriorating, and, as exchange 
market sentiment supported greater convergence 
in the level of nominal 
interest rates, official interest rates were 
reduced significantly 
towards the lower 
German levels. As a result, interest rate 
differentials vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark declined to 
historically low levels and in some cases were 
largely eliminated 
in the first half of 1991 (see Chart 3). During the second half, the 
persistence of inflationary pressures 
and strong monetary 
growth in Germany led to further increases 
in official interest rates. As foreign exchange market 
sentiment suggested 
that limits to 
the reduction of interest rate differentials 
had been reached, 
the increases in German interest rates 
were accompanied by increases in the other narrow-band 
countries; in some cases interest 
differentials temporarily widened. 
z 2 0, Q) (D W 01 awu owzl- CHART 4: RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN INTEREST RATES BELGIUM DENMARK 3 M. DOMESTIC .-..- BONDS GERMANY I 12 GREECE - 3 M. DOMESTIC BONDS FRANCE - - 3M.DOMEsTIC - .---- BONDS - - - - - - ., - - - - - - - 11111111111 11111111111 11111111111 CHART 4: (continued) IRELAND 13 NETHERLANDS 3 M. DOMESTIC -m--- BONDS P 10 10 UNITED KINGDOM ITALY 15 - 3 M DOMESTIC - --..- BONDS - - - - - - - - - Illllllllll 11111111111 11l11111111 PORTUGAL 17 17 EEC (Weighted avg.) and USA l3 l l3 - EEC. 3 M. DOMESTIC . . 
. . . 
EEC BONDS USA. 3 M. DOMESTIC . - -. . USA: BONDS 4 89 90 91 In the two 
countries - the United 
Kingdom and Spain - whose currencies participate 
in the wide band of the 
ERM and 
where interest rates had risen particularly strongly 
in 1988-89, short-term rates have 
been reduced substantially 
since the start of Stage 
One. The decline 
reflected progress in reducing inflation and, 
in the case of Spain, also 
the strength 
of the 
peseta. In the second half of 
1991, there were signs that 
limits to the narrowing of interest rate 
differentials between the pound sterling and the narrow-band currencies were 
being approached. Outside the ERM, short-term 
rates rose sharply in Portugal and 
Greece in the second half of 1990. Rates have 
remained high through 1991 to signal the 
authorities' determination 
to bring inflation closer to 
the levels elsewhere 
in the Community. 
Long-term interest 
rates in the Community 
had also risen 
in 1988-89, but 
the increases were 
less pronounced than those 
of short-term rates, resulting 
in flatter, and in some cases 
inverted, yield 
curves (see Charts 4 and 5). Between the middle of 
1990 and 
the end of 1991, long-term 
rates fell 
in the narrow-band countries. The decline, however, 
was smallest in Germany and the 
Netherlands and 
hence long-term interest rate 
differentials also narrowed, albeit to 
a lesser extent than the differentials in the money markets. As with short-term rates, long-term 
rates came 
down more sharply in Spain and the United Kingdom. 
Long-term rates have also fallen markedly 
in Portugal. Although various factors 
may influence long-term interest rates, 
their decline suggests that expectations of future inflation 
decreased. Long-term rates have fallen 
further in early 1992. 2.2 Exchange rate 
developments in the ERM The most notable feature of recent exchange 
market developments has been the stability 
of conditions 
within the ERM. This stands 
in marked contrast to the global 
environment of large, and at times erratic, movements of 
the exchange rates of 
third currencies vis-h-vis the ERM currencies (see Chart 
6). Participation in the ERM was extended in October 1990 when the pound sterling joined the 
mechanism, with a fluctuation margin 
of *6%. The ERM has functioned smoothly since 
the start 
of Stage One and the occasional periods of tension have not 
seriously threatened 
the maintenance of central parities. The overall stability 
of the system is all 
the more striking in the light of various 
factors which could have 
resulted CHART5: LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES IN ERM COUNTRIES *) ORIGINAL NARROW BAND COUNTRIES 15 ,., BELGIUM ...... DENMARK - GERMANY - ,,,, FRANCE ............ IRELAND . NETHERLANDS .L. -. . . -. . . 
. . 
. . . * . . 
- OTHER ERM 
COUNTRIES *) Government or public sector bonds 
in more extensive exchange rate tensions. 
These include 
the volatility of the US dollar; the 
considerable uncertainty associated 
with the Gulf crisis; political and economic upheaval 
in Central and Eastern Europe; 
and the divergence between 
the cyclical positions of 
Community countries. 
Possible explanations for the increase 
in stability of 
exchange rates are 
discussed in the next 
section. The behaviour of individual currencies suggests 
that nominal 
interest rate 
differentials have been a 
major factor determining exchange 
rate movements 
in the fluctuation band, with high yielding currencies often 
approaching the upper margin 
(see Chart 
7). In the wide band, 
the Spanish 
peseta remained consistently 
in the upper half of its fluctuation 
margin, sometimes reaching the upper 
intervention rate. In the narrow band, 
the Italian lira 
was often the strongest currency. 
When interest rates 
firmed in Germany during 
the second half of 1990 and again 
in 1991, the Deutsche Mark moved into 
the upper part of the narrow band, 
accompanied by the Dutch guilder and the Belgian 
franc. In contrast, in France and Denmark, where 
the authorities lowered interest rates 
when possible, their respective 
currencies tended to remain 
in the lower part of the 
narrow band. Some exchange rate strains have arisen, however, 
when market participants considered that interest rate 
differentials did not correspond to perceived exchange 
risks. On two occasions, in the summer 
of 1990 and the spring of 1991, high-yielding 
currencies (the Spanish peseta, 
joined in the first instance 
by the Italian lira) were for a time at, or close to, 
their respective upper intervention limits 
against a currency or currencies with relatively low interest rates (the French franc, 
joined in the first instance by the Deutsche Mark 
and the Dutch guilder). In late 1990, the currencies of 
some ERM countries in relatively weak cyclical positions came 
under downward 
pressure as the Deutsche 
Mark strengthened in response to 
higher German interest rates 
and the weakness 
of the US dollar. Finally, there were tensions in late 1991 related to the 
increase in German rates. Episodes of tension were 
quickly countered 
by the monetary authorities 
by intra-marginal interventions, 
interest rate changes and movements in the band. 2.3 Factors behind ERM stability A major reason for 
the smooth operation of the 
ERM over this 
period has been the 
assessment by market participants that prospects for the maintenance of exchange rate parities had improved. 
This development 
is - CHART 7: POSITIONS OF ERM CURRENCIES Weekly averages 
of percentage deviations 
from central rates a) 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 1 1 0 0 -1 -1 1989 1990 1991 a) The distance between 
two currencies represents 
the percentage difference between 
their market exchange rate and their bilateral 
central parity. 
The Spanish peseta and 
the British pound entered the 
ERM wide band in June 1989 
and October 1990, respectively. 
b) In January 1990, the Italian lira 
entered the narrow band, 
and its central rate was adjusted downwards, 
while keeping unchanged 
the lower limit of the band. 
in turn linked to the 
effective policy 
measures taken 
by the national central banks to counter periods 
of tensions. As market participants expected authorities to 
counteract exchange 
market tensions, 
the incentive to take foreign exchange 
positions in favour of a 
realignment was 
reduced. As a result, the 
stabilising properties of 
the system were reinforced. While difficult 
to assess and 
to quantify, evidence from 
two sources suggests that market 
expectations of a 
realignment diminished in the period under review. A first 
indicator, which sheds some light 
on short-run expectations, is 
the forward 
exchange rate. If the forward exchange rate is 
outside the 
maximum range allowed 
by the fluctuation band, 
this can be interpreted 
as signalling the expectations 
of a realignment over the relevant 
time horizon. 
Indeed, the above indicator using 
the twelve-month forward 
rates vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark suggests that market 
expectations of a realignment 
have been 
the lowest since the inception 
of the EMS (see Chart 
8). A second indicator of exchange 
rate expectations is provided by long-term interest rate differentials, 
which supply information on the credibility of parities 
over a longer period. Although the differential 
should be 
interpreted with caution because of 
the different 
rnaturities, fiscal treatment and 
liquidity of the bonds being compared, the progressive 
reduction in long-term interest rate differentials vis-8-vis the Deutsche Mark during Stage 
One again suggests stronger 
market confidence 
in the maintenance of central parities in the ERM (see Chart 
5). Strengthened market 
confidence may be ascribed 
to several factors, some reflecting structural 
and political developments as well as 
others of 
a conjunctural nature. Firstly, the absence of a 
general realignment since 
January 1987 demonstrates policy-makers' growing 
awareness of the 
potential drawbacks of changes 
in parities, both 
in terms of the resulting 
inflationary stimulus 
and the damage to the credibility 
of their "hard currency policyn. Moreover, the removal 
of capital controls and 
the political momentum towards EMU have further 
added to confidence 
in the authorities* commitment 
to exchange rate stability. Secondly, differences 
in inflation performance in the Community have declined, and 
the largest current-account imbalances 
in countries participating 
in the ER. have narrowed. Finally, market 
perceptions of the impact 
of German unification 
tended to reduce 
the relative strength 
of the Deutsche Mark 
in the ERM for much of this 
period, easing the pressures on other currencies associated 
7 V) 2 G , m .c IS) 0 m C 'D 9 5 C so > c 0 'D .= a, m IS) = m ti - c 2 a, - U - & S Q% m a, z a, Q 2 5 IS) UJ 6': 5 2 3 Q 2 c 2 L% .2 a, fn = E { .- - a, a, g: - with the maintenance 
of high interest 
rates in Germany. However, the Deutsche Mark regained its relative strength in the ERM in the second half of 1991, as the Deutsche Bundesbank raised official 
interest rates twice to 
reaffirm its determination 
to continue a stability-oriented 
monetary policy. Monetary authorities have also fostered stability 
by reacting quickly and 
effectively to episodes of exchange 
market tensions. Policy 
responses complied with the principles of the 
1987 Basle-Nyborg Agreement, 
which calls on the authorities to make flexible 
and co-ordinated use of interest rate changes, intervention, 
and the scope 
for movement within 
the band. The relative importance 
of the instruments employed differed from 
country to country, depending on 
the authorities' 
assessment of the source of the tensions and 
of the likely impact of the policy 
change on domestic economic conditions. 
While in some countries - such as Belgium and the 
Netherlands - the authorities relied primarily 
on changes in interest rates, in others - such as Italy 
and the United 
Kingdom - the scope 
for exchange rate movements within 
the band has been 
used more actively. The 
intensity and frequency of foreign exchange market intervention also 
differed, but 
it is noteworthy that intervention 
was in general accompanied by the use of 
other instruments. 
2.4 Exchange rate policies of 
non-ERM countries 
Portugal and Greece have 
strengthened to different degrees 
the links between 
their currencies and those participating 
in the ERM to assist 
the fight against inflation and 
to prepare the ground 
for eventual 
entry into the mechanism (see 
Chart 9). With effect from 1st October 1990, 
Portugal abandoned its long-standing crawling-peg 
policy and 
allowed the escudo to fluctuate within 
an undisclosed band against a basket of 
ERM currencies. The high interest 
rate differential 
in favour of the 
escudo attracted large capital inflows, 
complicating monetary management and 
contributing to 
an overshooting of 
the monetary 
target. This 
was counteracted by the temporary re-imposition of controls on short-term capital flows. In Greece foreign exchange 
policy is also geared 
towards inflation reduction. Drachma depreciation 
no longer fully offsets 
the inflation and 
labour cost differentials 
vis-8-vis major trading partners, 
thus adding 
to competitive pressures in the economy. 
CHART 9: EXCHANGE RATES 
OF THE 
GREEK DRACHMA 
AND PORTUGUESE ESCUDO *) (AGAINST ERM CURRENCIES) Greek drachma 
Portuguese escudo 
*) Percentage deviation from the level 
of July 1990 (increase = appreciation of GRD or 
PTE) ERM corresponds to a 
weighted average of the ERM currencies 
(using normalised ECU weights). 
2.5 Develo~ments in the Private 
ECU The official ECU, defined as a currency 
basket composed of 
specific amounts of the currencies 
of the EEC Member 
States, came into 
existence in March 1979 at the inception 
of the EMS. It is used 
within the EMS to express the central 
exchange rate 
of participating currencies, to denominate certain claims 
and liabilities, and as a reserve instrument. The 
introduction of the official ECU 
has stimulated the 
evolution of a market 
in private ECUs, created by commercial banks. This market 
is being used 
on a significant 
and growing scale by public authorities and by the private sector. To date, 
the most important usage of 
the private ECU has been 
in financial domain (see Table 8). The ECU still has to make 
a breakthrough 
in the non-financial sphere; its use as 
an invoicing currency 
and as a means 
of settlement of non-financial transactions remains 
very limited. There is a substantial bond market denominated 
in private ECUs, with outstanding bonds amounting 
to ECU 110 billion at the end of September 1991. The share 
of total 
international bond issues denominated in ECU has been rising sharply; it was 12% in the first nine months of 1991 (compared with 34% for the US dollar and 11% for the Japanese 
yen), making it the second 
most commonly-used 
currency for international 
bond issuance in that period. Furthermore, there is a sizable market 
in short-term ECU 
securities, both in the form of Treasury bills 
and commercial 
paper. The ECU banking market has also attained a significant 
scale, with nearly ECU 
180 billion of 
lending outstanding 
at end-September 1991, of which ECU 
46 billion represented loans to non-banks. 
ECU banking is continuing to expand strongly at a time when the overall market, and all 
other major currency sectors, are 
contracting. Furthermore, whereas in the past the growth 
of ECU banking business 
was dominated by a demand for ECU 
credit, since 1989 there has been a tendency for 
ECU deposits to grow faster than ECU 
lending. This tendency was partly related to the 
accumulation of ECU reserves by central banks; as a result, the banking 
system has gradually reduced its net asset position and 
has become a 
net borrower of ECUs 
as from 1991. The strong expansion of ECU markets appears 
to have 
been related to continued market perception 
of the ECU's merits as a vehicle 
to hedge against exchange 
and interest rate 
risks. In addition, the Intergovernmental Conference 
on EMU and the prospective role of 
the ECU in the Third Stage appear 
to have stimulated the 
financial use of 
the private 
TABLE 8: ECU FINANCIAL MARKETS 
a) Source: BIS International Bonds Domestic Bonds 
Treasury Bills Euro-commercial paper 
and notes Bank Assets - interbank - other Bank Liabilities - interbank - other Memorandum Item: Central Banks' holdings of private ECUs a) There is an overlap, in particular between the securities and banking markets, owing to the role of banks as both issuers and holders of ECU securities; thus 
the total size of the market is less than 
the sum 
of the individual markets given 
in this table. ECU billion outstanding 
Sep. 1991 72.3 39.2 7.9 9.7 175.7 (129.8) (45.9) 180.9 (143.1) (37.8) 34.1 Dec. 1989 45.9 24.4 10.3 2.9 128.2 (97.4) (30.8) 116.9 (92.4) (24.5) 17.0 (end of period) Dec. 1990 54.7 35.2 8.4 6.1 148.6 (114.3) (34.3) 149.8 (118.2) (31.6) 27.1 ECU. It should also be recalled that 
the authorities 
of some Community countries and 
supranational institutions continue 
to play an important role in the ECU financial markets. For example, 
around half of the 
outstanding stock of 
international ECU 
bonds have been issued 
by national governments 
and international institutions, 
predominantly in the Community, with the balance of the funds borrowed by the business sector. Some central 
banks also hold the 
private ECU as a reserve asset. 
At the 
end of 
September 1991 
central banks together held ECU 34 billion of such reserves. In many cases these 
assets were acquired from the proceeds 
of government borrowing in ECUs. On a number of occasions central 
banks have undertaken intervention 
in private ECUs 
in the foreign exchange 
market. Derivative financial products in ECUs have been 
launched by the London and Paris 
Futures exchanges, including an ECU long-bond future 
and a 
three-month interest 
rate future. PROSPECTS AND MONETARY POLICY ISSUES 
When conducting the second 
ex ante co-ordination exercise, which 
examined national monetary policy objectives 
for 1992, the Committee 
of Governors reviewed 
forecasts of economic and 
monetary developments 
in the Community. In judging the appropriate 
thrust of monetary 
policy, particular attention was paid to the large 
margin of 
uncertainty surrounding these 
projections and 
the assumptions underpinning 
them. Economic prospects 
Forecasts presently indicate that a 
modest upturn 
in world economic growth is in prospect in 1992, which will 
provide a stimulus 
to activity within the Community. 
In the United 
States, the hesitant recovery is expected to gain momentum 
as the year progresses. Nevertheless, growth 
for the year as a whole is likely 
to be much lower than experienced in the early stages of past upswings. The Japanese economy may 
continue to slow in the early part of 
the year, although recent cuts 
in interest rates 
and budgetary measures are 
expected to limit the cyclical downturn. Activity in the EFTA countries may pick up moderately. However, given 
the close trade integration with the Community, 
the recovery expected 
in EFTA markets 
hinges in turn on a prospective 
upturn in Community markets. World trade prices are likely to remain relatively soft in 1992, leading to only small 
increases in import prices in the Community. 
Against this slowly improving international 
background, and signs 
in many countries 
that domestic conditions 
are gradually beginning to turn 
around, an upturn in economic growth 
in the Community is expected in the course of 1992. Forecasts 
produced in the autumn indicated 
that aggregate economic activity 
in the Community may 
expand by about 2% for the year as a 
whole, a rate 
of growth which would not exert pressures 
on capacity and 
labour utilisation. More 
recent data, however, suggest that 
the outcome could be less favourable. A marked reduction 
in the divergence of annual growth 
rates in the Cornunity is likely in 1992. Growth 
in western Germany will be lower, following several years 
of extraordinary buoyancy, whereas 
in the eastern 
LBnder a sharp 
turnaround is expected. On the other 
hand, most Community countries may have 
passed the 
cyclical trough, although the 
speed and strength of the recovery remain uncertain. Some improvement 
in convergence in budgetary positions 
has been assumed far 1992 on the basis 
of government intentions, although the overall fiscal imbalance 
in the Community is likely to 
remain large. A radical fiscal tightening is planned in Greece and Italy to make 
up the ground lost in 1991 and to move budgetary positions closer to a sustainable medium-term basis. In the other countries 
with either high levels 
of debt or deficits, a relatively firm fiscal stance 
is expected by the national 
authorities, although the prospective reductions 
in budgetary deficits are 
fairly small in most cases. At the Community level, the planned consolidation in the high 
deficit countries 
may be largely offset by an increase in the budget deficits in some countries with both relatively low debt and 
deficits, where 
cyclical conditions 
remain relatively weak. 
As far as labour cost 
pressures are concerned, 
some slowdown in wage growth was expected in the ex ante exercise 
for monetary 
policy co-ordination. This 
was based on the assumption that the resistance 
of firms to meet high wage 
claims would 
stiffen in an 
environment of relatively weak demand and strong competition, as well as that incomes 
policies, where applied, 
would be strengthened. Moreover, should activity 
recover as expected, 
there may also 
be a cyclical improvement 
in productivity, which would contribute to a moderation 
of unit costs. 3.2 Monetary policy prospects In the ex ante co-ordination exercise, 
the Committee of Governors considered that the 
national monetary policy intentions for the current 
year were consistent with the objective 
of reducing inflation in the Community. This assessment, however, 
was contingent upon the assumption that price 
developments would not be threatened by a number of factors outside the control of the monetary authorities. 
In this respect, not 
only may the assumptions 
about the international environment prove 
too optimistic, but there are also 
risks in a number of countries that 
plans for fiscal consolidation 
will not 
be realised, adding 
to the overall fiscal 
pressure in the Community, 
and that 
cost pressures 
will not 
abate as 
expected. If these risks 
materialise, monetary policies 
will have to be reviewed, and, 
if necessary, revised taking due 
account of their primary objective of 
promoting price stability. 
The task of monetary 
policy co-ordination will continue to prove 
difficult, as long as significant divergences persist 
between national 
economic conditions. In the last 
two years, foreign exchange market 
expectations have led to pressures 
for a marked narrowing of interest rate differentials in the Community. 
As a result, the scope 
for setting interest rates with a view to national economic conditions has 
become rather 
restricted. If the benefits 
of exchange rate stability 
are to be preserved, a monetary response 
to shocks originating 
in one country 
- especially if that country plays an important role in shaping economic 
conditions throughout the Community - would be quickly transmitted to 
the other 
Community countries. In this situation, there is a risk that 
a monetary tightening to counteract unfavourable 
price developments in some Member 
States will conflict with the desire for lower 
interest rates 
in countries with a low, or rapidly falling, 
rate of inflation and weak economic activity. However, the resulting policy 
dilemmas between domestic 
objectives and the desire to 
maintain exchange rate 
stability cannot be resolved by monetary policies alone. 
The high degree 
of integration in the Community and the interdependence between the 
national economies imposes 
constraints on all areas 
of national macro-economic management. The 
primary objective of monetary 
policy is to promote price stability 
throughout the Community and it 
is against this objective that the 
success and effectiveness of monetary policy will be judged. As 
long as strong price 
pressures continue 
in a number of countries, there will be severe limits 
to the scope for easing the overall 
monetary conditions 
in the Community. 
The difficulties 
involved in co-ordinating monetary policies in the presence of divergent national conditions, as 
well as the 
costs associated with an unbalanced policy mix, make it of the utmost importance that plans for fiscal consolidation are 
realised and that excessive wage claims are 
contained. Progress in 
these fields is 
essential not only to achieve a marked reduction 
in inflation in 1992 but also to strengthen 
the foundations underpinning 
exchange rate stability 
in the Community and 
to prepare for entry into Stage 
Three of 
EMU. 111. THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES 
OF THE NEW MONETARY INSTITUTIONS IN 
STAGES TWO AND THREE OF ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION 
In December 1991 the Heads of State 
or of Government 
agreed on the text of a Treaty 
on European Union 
which lays the legal and 
institutional foundations for 
an advancement towards a Political Union 
and the establishment 
of Economic and Monetary Union. 
The Treaty 
was signed on 7th February 
1992 and is expected 
to be ratified 
by the Member States in 
the course of 
1992. The realisation 
of EMU in accordance with the new Treaty will 
have a significant impact 
on all aspects of 
economic management 
in the Community. Essential elements of economic union will be economic 
policy co-ordination and rules 
aimed at the avoidance of excessive budget deficits. However, the 
consequences of the realisation of EMU will be most profound in the field of monetary 
policy. Possibly soon after end-1996 
- if the necessary conditions for entering Stage 
Three of 
EMU are found 
to have been met - but at the latest on 1st January 1999, the responsibility for 
monetary policy in the participating 
Member States 
will be transferred 
from the national level to 
the European 
System of Central Banks 
(ESCB). In order to ensure that 
the groundwork 
for the unprecedented move to a single, centrally decided monetary 
policy is laid, 
a European Monetary Institute 
(EMI) will be set up at the start of 
Stage Two 
on 1st January 1994. 
The EMI, which will be liquidated on the establishment 
of the ECB, will not 
only strengthen further 
the co-ordination of national monetary policies 
but will also 
prepare the necessary 
regulatory, organisational 
and logistical framework for the 
ESCB to perform its 
tasks. The Statutes 
of these two institutions 
(which are reproduced 
in Annexes I11 and IV) closely reflect the proposals 
made by the Committee of Governors as its contribution to 
the preparatory work for the Treaty on European Union. 1. THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF CENTRAL BANKS Article 1091(4) of the new Treaty states 
that: "At the starting 
date of the 
third stage, the Council shall, acting 
with the unanimity 
of the Member States without 
a derogation, on a proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting 
the ECB, adopt 
the conversion rates 
at which 
their currencies shall 
be irrevocably fixed and at which 
irrevocably fixed 
rate the ECU shall be substituted for these 
currencies, and the ECU will 
become a currency 
in its own right. This measure shall by itself not modify the external value of the 
ECU. The Council 
shall, acting according to the same procedure, also 
take the other 
measures necessary for the 
rapid introduction of the 
ECU as the single currency 
of those Member 
Statesn. The irrevocable fixing 
of exchange rates rules out 
any possibility of participating 
countries continuing to pursue independent monetary policies. Monetary Union thus implies the loss of monetary policy autonomy at the 
level of the national central 
banks and the adoption of a single monetary 
policy which, in 
accordance with the Treaty, will 
be defined and implemented 
jointly in the framework of the 
ESCB. The ESCB will operate in accordance with the provisions 
of the Treaty 
and of 
its Statute (see Annex 111). 1.1 Objectives of 
the ESCB 
The transfer 
of national decision-making power 
over monetary 
policy underscores the necessity for a clear consensus on the objectives, tasks, and operational features 
of the System. Building 
on the firmly 
shared conviction that 
price stability 
is a precondition 
for sustainable economic growth, the principal task 
of the ESCB is stated unequivocally: 
"the primary objective of the ESCB shall 
be to maintain price stabilityn. This should not be misinterpreted as 
implying that 
monetary policy will be conducted single-mindedly, 
with no regard to the 
other objectives 
of economic policy, as the Statute also requires 
the ESCB 
"to support the general economic policies 
in the Communityn, providing this takes 
place "without prejudice to the objective 
of price stabilityn. 1.2 Organisational features 
of the 
ESCB The organisational 
structure has 
been designed 
to ensure 
an effective achievement 
of the primary objective. The ESCB will consist of a new central institution, the European 
Central Bank (ECB) and the 
national central banks, which will be governed by a common set 
of rules. For the 
System to operate efficiently and coherently, the Member States 
are obliged to ensure 
that national legislation, 
including the statutes 
of each national central 
bank, are 
compatible with the Treaty and the Statute 
of the ECB. The System will be governed 
by the decision-making bodies of the ECB, the Governing Council 
and the Executive Board. The Governing Council 
will be the supreme decision-making 
body on all matters 
relating to the ESCB's tasks and operations. 
It will comprise the President, 
Vice-President, the other 
four members of the Executive Board and the Governors of the national central 
banks. In turn the Executive Board will be entrusted with the day-to-day implementation 
of monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines and decisions laid 
down by the Governing Council. To the extent deemed 
possible and 
appropriate, the ECB shall have 
recourse to the national central 
banks to 
carry out these 
operations. This structure meets 
two essential 
requirements. On the one hand, it allows monetary 
policy decisions 
to be placed firmly in the hands 
of the central decision-making 
body. On the other hand, it 
offers the 
possibility of executing policy decisions through the national central 
banks . 1.3 Independence and 
democratic accountability of the 
System In order for 
the System 
to maintain 
price stability it is 
important that 
the decision-making authorities 
shall not 
be influenced 
by considerations which would 
conflict with this aim. 
In consequence the Statute states 
that the 
ECB, the national central 
banks and any member 
of their decision-making 
bodies shall act 
without receiving instructions from 
political authorities. 
The favourable experience 
with independent monetary authorities in a number of countries 
is particularly relevant for 
a plural 
Community society where 
competing interests 
may tend to give greater 
thought to short-term considerations and thus lead 
to pressures in favour of a monetary policy stance which would not always 
be compatible with price stability in the longer 
run. The Statute contains 
a number 
of provisions to give 
practical effect to the principle of independence. 
Firstly, it ensures that members 
of the decision-making 
bodies can exercise their 
functions under 
assured tenure. Secondly, the functional, operational and 
financial provisions guarantee the economic independence 
of the System. Finally, the 
principle of "one person, one 
vote" in the Governing Council also constitutes 
an element of independence, 
since it reflects the 
consensus that members act 
on behalf of the System 
rather than 
as representatives of the Member 
States. While independence is 
considered to be an essential prerequisite 
for the fulfilment 
of the 
System's tasks, it is also fully recognised 
in the Statute that there must 
be democratic legitimacy 
and accountability. The Statute, 
which as part of 
the Treaty on European Union will 
have to be ratified by the Member States, 
clearly defines the powers entrusted 
to the Governing Council and 
the Executive 
Board, and 
the scope of 
their responsibilities. In addition, the President, Vice-President and 
other members of 
the Executive Board are appointed 
by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the level of the 
Heads of State 
or Government on a recommendation from 
the Council 
(of Ministers of Finance and Economic Affairs 
- the ECOFIN Council) after 
consulting the European 
Parliament and the Governing 
Council. The central 
bank Governors continue to be appointed by the competent 
national authorities, 
but the 
term of office of a 
Governor of a 
national central bank shall 
be no less than five year S. Transparency is 
an important element of democratic 
accountability. In addition to regular 
reports on the operation 
of the System and 
the publication of weekly consolidated financial statements, 
the ECB will present annual reports to the 
European Council, 
the ECOFIN Council, the Commission and the 
European Parliament. Transparency is 
further enhanced by the provision that the President of the ECOFIN Council 
and a member of the 
Commission may participate, without having the 
right to vote, in meetings of the Governing 
Council. 1.4 Operational and 
functional aspects 
To ensure 
the efficient 
operation of monetary policy, 
the Statute 
provides the System 
with the powers to select and 
utilise the necessary instruments and techniques 
of monetary 
control. The relevant 
provisions have been drafted 
with due regard to the evolutionary 
nature of financial markets and 
will allow the System to 
respond flexibly to changing market conditions. To avoid any obligation for 
the System which would render it extremely difficult, 
if not impossible, to attain 
price stability, the Statute denies the ECB 
and the national central 
banks the possibility 
of providing overdrafts or other types of 
credit facilities to 
public entities. In the field of exchange rate policy, the ESCB 
has been 
entrusted with the task of holding 
and managing the official reserves of the Member 
States and of 
conducting foreign 
exchange operations. 
This task must be exercised consistently with the provisions of the 
Treaty. The ECOFIN 
Council may "conclude formal 
agreements on an exchange rate system for 
the ECU vis-a-vis non-Community currencies", 
or, in the absence 
of such a system, may "formulate general 
orientations for exchange rate 
policyn. A number of safeguards 
have been introduced 
to avoid possible conflicts 
between measures taken 
or views 
expressed by 
the ECOFIN Council and the operation of monetary 
policy by the ESCB. In particular, when concluding formal exchange rate "agreements" 
the Council must consult 
the ECB "in an endeavour to reach a consensus consistent 
with the objective of price stability', while "general orientations" for exchange rate 
policy "shall be without prejudice to the 
primary objective 
of the ESCB to maintain 
price stabilityn. The System has also 
been assigned the 
task of 
promoting the 
smooth operation 
of payment 
systems. In relation to the 
wider goal of preserving financial stability in the Community, the ESCB "shall contribute 
as necessary to the smooth conduct 
of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities relating to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the stability 
of the financial systemn. Furthermore, 
the ECB has 
been provided with an advisory role 
on any proposed 
Community or national 
legislation within its 
field of competence. 
1.5 Transitional aspects 
The ESCB 
will be established immediately 
after the date has 
been set for the 
start of 
Stage Three, 
or by mid-1998 at 
the latest. 
In the event that some Member 
States do not 
fulfil the conditions 
for moving 
to the final stage 
they will be granted a 
derogation; protocols relating to 
Denmark and 
the United Kingdom make 
similar provisions 
should a 
decision be taken by either of these countries 
not to enter the final stage 
of EMU. Participation in the ESCB of 
the national central 
banks of 
Member States 
with a derogation is 
governed by special provisions 
in the Statute. These 
provisions recognise 
that monetary policy in these Member States remains 
a national responsibility 
and, furthermore, that these central 
banks should not participate in the formulation and execution of the single monetary policy pursued 
by the ESCB. However, to ensure that co-operation 
with these central banks is maintained, particularly in view of the need to 
prepare for their 
eventual full integration into 
the System, a further decision-making body of the 
ECB will 
be created, the General Council. This Council will be composed of the President and 
Vice-President of the 
ECB, and the Governors 
of the national central banks of all the Member States, 
and will perform consultative 
and advisory functions. 
It will 
cease to exist when all Member 
States of the Community 
have entered the final stage of EMU. 2. THE EUROPEAN MONETARY INSTITUTE 
The EM1 will be instrumental in facilitating and organising the transition to the single 
monetary policy which will 
come into effect in one step at the start 
of Stage Three. 
In preparing the 
transfer of monetary policy competence to the 
future ESCB, two aspects have to 
be taken into consideration. On the one hand, the responsibility for monetary 
policy will remain with the national authorities 
of the 
individual Member 
States, until the start of Stage 
Three, and, 
on the other, at 
the latest at that 
moment the conditions 
and operating procedures required 
for the conduct of the single monetary 
policy will have to be firmly in place. For this reason a 
two-pronged strategy will be followed in the transitional 
phase: national monetary policies will be co-ordinated 
even more 
closely than in the past and, at 
the same time, a wide range of preparatory work will 
be undertaken in order to enable 
the future 
ESCB to perform its tasks. Obviously, the changes in monetary policy operations which will 
become applicable in Stage Three must not infringe on national monetary 
policy autonomy during the transitional phase. However, the need 
to reach a state of readiness on the eve of Stage Three also implies 
that preparations will have 
to be made for the necessary adaptations 
to instruments and procedures currently 
used at national levels 
. 2.1 The tasks 
of the EM1 The importance 
of guiding monetary 
developments towards the introduction of the single monetary 
policy is clearly recognised 
in the three basic 
tasks assigned to 
the EM1 (see Annex 
IV). Firstly, the EM1 is entrusted with strengthening the co-ordination of national monetary policies with a view to ensuring price stability. 
This primary task, together with certain advisory functions, implies 
the assumption of the 
role currently 
performed by the Committee of Governors, which will 
be dissolved on the establishment of the EMI. 
In addition, the EM1 will have to facilitate the use of the private 
ECU and oversee its development, 
including the smooth functioning 
of the ECU clearing system. 
Secondly, the EM1 is called upon to make the preparation required for the conduct 
of a single monetary 
policy in. Stage Three and for 
the establishment of the ESCB 
and the 
creation of a single currency. 
To this end, the EM1 will have to 
specify at the latest by the end of 
1996 the regulatory, organisation and 
logistical framework for the ESCB. This will 
include not only the 
preparation of the 
necessary monetary 
policy instruments and procedures, 
but also cover such areas 
as the harmonisation 
of rules and practices governing the 
collection, compilation 
and distribution of the 
relevant monetary and financial statistics, 
the promotion of 
efficient EC cross-border 
payments and the supervision 
of the 
technical preparation 
of ECU bank notes. Moreover, the 
EM1 may be given additional tasks 
relating to the 
preparation of Stage Three. Thirdly, the EM1 has some operational 
tasks which partly arise from the transfer of 
the functions of the 
present European 
Monetary Co-operation Fund, which will cease to exist at the start 
of Stage Two. Such tasks include 
in particular the 
issuance of official ECUs for the purpose of implementing 
the EMS Agreement. In addition, the EM1 is entitled to hold and manage foreign 
exchange reserves 
as an agent for, and at the request of, Community central 
banks. This latter function, however, is 
subject to rules to 
be adopted by the EM1 which shall ensure that 
the EMI's transactions with these reserves 
do not interfere 
with the monetary and exchange rate 
policies of 
the national authorities and are consistent with 
the objectives of the EM1 and the proper 
functioning of the ERM. 2.2 The structure of the 
EM1 The EM1 will be a Community 
body which will have its 
own legal personality. It will be governed by the Council 
of the 
EM1 which, in addition to the Governors 
of the national central banks, 
will include a President appointed 
by common accord of the Governments of the Member States at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government on a recommendation from the Committee of Governors from 
among persons 
of recognised 
standing and professional 
expertise in monetary or banking matters. 
The President 
will prepare and chair the meetings 
of the Council 
of the EMI, 
present the 
views of the 
EM1 externally and 
be responsible for the day-to-day management. A Vice-President, chosen 
from among the 
central bank governors, will perform these duties in the absence of the President. 
The EM1 will be an independent body. The Council of 
the EM1 may not seek or 
take any 
instructions from 
Community institutions or bodies 
or Governments of Member States. However, since the responsibility 
for monetary policy remains with the national authorities, it is also 
recognised that 
the Governors 
are the representatives 
of their 
institutions. Nevertheless, with 
respect to their 
activities on the Council 
of the EMI, they will act according 
to their 
own responsibilities. During Stage Two, each Member State, 
as appropriate, will have 
to' start the process leading to the 
independence of its central bank, 
completing it at 
the latest by the time of 
the establishment of the 
ESCB. The EM1 will have its own financial 
resources to cover its administrative expenditure. These resources 
will be paid up at the establishment of the 
EM1 in the form of contributions shared 
by the Community central 
banks in accordance with a key reflecting in equal proportions their countries' 
GDP and population. The existence of the EM1 will end with the establishment of the ECB and 
it will go 
into liquidation 
in accordance with the rules 
laid down in the EM1 Statute. 2.3 Preparatory work in the monetary field 
for the move to 
Stages Two and Three 
of EMU The Treaty 
on European Union sets a very 
ambitious agenda for 
the institutional, organisation 
and legal measures 
which at the latest 
will have to 
be specified 
by the end of 
1996, i.e. within less than five 
years. While the preparatory measures for 
the conduct of a single 
monetary policy are explicitly assigned 
to the 
EMI, the complexity of the issues 
involved and the time needed to resolve 
them makes 
it prudent not to await 
the establishment of 
the EM1 on 1st January 1994 but rather to 
commence preparatory work in some of 
the relevant areas as soon as 
possible. For this reason, the Committee 
of Governors 
has not only embarked on the work required for setting 
up the EMI, but has also begun to take the 
first preparatory steps 
for laying the 
foundation for 
the conduct of the single 
monetary policy. PART B THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCm OF THE COMTTEE OF GOVERNORS 
I. THE CREATION 
AND THE EVOLVING ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS The Committee of Governors was created in 1964 by the Council 
Decision (64/300/EEC) of 8th May 1964 
on co-operation between the 
Central Banks of the Member States of the European 
Economic Community. The initial tasks of the Committee 
were: "to hold consultations concerning the general 
principles and the 
broad lines of policy of the Central Banks, in particular as regards credit and money and foreign exchange 
markets, and to 
exchange information 
at regular intervals about the most important measures that fall 
within the competence of the Central Banks, and to examine these While these original 
tasks reflected the modest ambitions 
prevailing at 
that time 
with respect to monetary co-operation within 
the Community, the Committee's role was 
increased at 
the end of 
the 1960s as 
monetary integration 
progressed and plans 
to create an economic and monetary union were first launched. 1 In 1971, the Community Central Banks 
were invited to co-ordinate their policies in monetary and credit matters within the Committee 
of ~overnors.' The Committee also 
became a vehicle for central 
bank co-operation in the balance-of-payments and exchange rate 
fields. In 1970, the Community central 
banks set 
up the system of short-term monetary a multilateral credit 
system giving 
access to short-term funds in case of a temporary balance-of-payments deficit 
due to unforeseen difficulties or 
to conjunctural divergences. Another 
step on the road towards monetary integration 
was made in 1972 with 
the establishment of the 1 See the report to the Council and the Commission 
on the realisation by stages of economic and monetary 
union in the Community (Werner Report), dated 8th October 1970. 
2 See Council Decision 
(71/142/EEC) of 22nd March 1971 
on the strengthening of co-operation between the 
central banks of the Member 
States of the European Economic Community. 
3 See 
the Agreement of 9th February 1970 setting up a system 
of short-term monetary support among 
the central banks of the Member 
States of the European 
Economic Community. 
system for the narrowing of the margins of fluctuation between 
the currencies of the 
Member States 
(the so-called :snaken). 4 At the end of the 1970s the Committee's 
tasks were extended further when the process of economic 
and monetary integration 
was revived. In March 1979, the European Monetary System (EMS) 
was set up to supersede 
the "snaken. The operational procedures were laid down in the central bank Agreement of 13th March 
1979,~ which since then has 
served as the institutional framework for central 
bank co-operation. In 1986, when 
the EC Treaty was revised in the context of the Single European 
Act, advisory status with respect to institutional 
changes in the monetary area 
was conferred upon the Committee 
of Governors (Article 
102 A). Additional advisory tasks 
were assigned to the 
Committee in 1988 with 
reference to 
the abolition of restrictions on capital movements under Article 
67 of the Treaty. Most recently, 
the Committee's responsibilities were increased in the context of Stage One 
of EMU. The mandate of the Committee 
was revised by the Council 
in March 1990 
and is reproduced 
in Annex I. The activities of the Committee under this 
revised mandate were described in Chapter I. 4 Agreement of 10th April 1972 between the central 
banks of the 
Member States of the Community 
on the narrowing of the margins of fluctuation between Community currencies. 5 Agreement of 13th March 
1979 between 
the central banks 
of the Member 
States of the European 
Economic Community laying 
down the operating 
procedures for the European 
Monetary System. The growing role 
of the Committee of 
Governors and 
the assignment of new tasks have 
necessitated changes 
in the Committee's organisational structure from time to 
time. The present structure was set up at the 
start of Stage One of 
EMU in July 1990 (see Chart 10). The Committee 
of Governors is composed of the Governors 
of the 
central banks of 
the Member 
States of the 
Community and the Director 
General of the 
Luxembourg Monetary Institute. A 
member of the 
Commission is regularly invited to the meetings of the Committee. 
In accordance with the mandate, "the members of the Committee, who are the representatives 
of their institutions, 
shall act, with 
respect to their activities on the Committee, according to 
their own responsibilities and having due 
regard to Community objectives". 
The Committee of Governors meets 
at regular intervals, normally 
ten times a year. 
The proceedings of the meetings are confidential; 
however, the Committee may 
authorise its Chairman to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public. In the performance of 
its duties, 
the Committee 
enjoys autonomy. It adopts its own 
rules of procedure 
and, unlike other Committees created under Community 
charter, has its 
own organisational structure. The Chairman is 
elected by the Committee from among its 
members. The present Chairman is 
Dr. E. Hoffmeyer, Governor 
of Danmarks Nationalbank; he succeeded Herr K.O. Pbhl, who relinquished the chairmanship when resigning as President of 
the Deutsche Bundesbank at 
the end of July 1991. The Committee 
of Governors 
is assisted 
by the Committee 
of Alternates, three sub-committees, 
the Secretariat 
and the Economic Unit. 
In addition, for 
specialised tasks, the Committee at times establishes ad hoc working groups. The Chairmen 
of the sub-committees and 
working groups 
are appointed by the Committee of 
Governors, which also appoints its 
Secretary General and the other professional members 
of the Secretariat 
and Economic Unit. The Commission is 
in general represented 
on the various sub-committees and 
ad hoc working groups. The Committee of Alternates 
is composed of senior 
representatives of Community central 
banks who have been 
appointed by the Governors as 
their alternates in the Committee of Governors. The main task of the Committee of Alternates is to 
prepare the 
meetings of 
the Committee of CHART 10: ORGANISATION CHART FOR THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS 
OF THE EEC MEMBER STATES (APRIL 1992) 
COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS Chairman: E. Hoffmeyer (1) SECRETARIAT & ECONOMIC UNIT Secretary General : COMMITTEE OF ALTERNATES l Chairman: FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
POLICY SUB-COMMI TTEE Chainnan: F. Saccmnni (2) MONETARY POLICY SUB-COMMI TTEE Chainnan: A. Borges (3) I Chairman: I I Chairman: I BANKING SUPERVISORY 
SUB-COMMITTEE I I AD HOC WORKING GROUP 
1 ON EC PAYMENT SYSTEMS 
1 Replaced K.O. Pohl with effect from 1st Au st 1991. Replaced H. Dalgaard with effect 
fm 1st %ember 1991. 1:) Replaced R. Raymond with effect fm 1st September 1991. B. @inn T . Padoa-Sch ioppa L --------------- 1 Governors on the basis 
of work carried out 
by the sub-committees, 
the Secretariat and the 
Economic Unit. 
The Committee 
of Alternates normally 
meets on the eve of the Committee 
of Governors' meetings. 
The Commission is, as a general rule, invited to 
send a senior official 
as a representative to the meetings of the Alternates. 
The Foreinn Exchange Policy 
Sub-Committee is 
composed of central bank officials who are involvea in the formulation and implementation 
of national foreign exchange policies. The Sub-Committee 
prepares the 
Governors' discussions on all foreign 
exchange issues. 
This preparatory work includes the monthly 
monitoring of exchange rate and 
monetary developments, the production of regular reports on the functioning of 
the EMS and 
developments in the use 
of the private 
ECU, as well 
as ad hoc studies on special topics. The Sub-Committee 
also arranges for the 
regular exchange of information 
with non-Community central 
banks in the framework 
of the "concertation proceduren. This procedure provides 
for the daily 
exchange of data on exchange market developments, intervention 
and other 
official foreign exchange transactions, 
and for monthly meetings 
of the "Concertation Group", which is composed of the 
members of the Sub-Committee and of the Heads of the Foreign Departments of the central 
banks of the United States, Canada, 
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, 
Austria and Switzerland. The Monetary Policy Sub-Committee is 
composed of central bank officials who are involved in the formulation and implementation 
of monetary policies 
in their national institutions. The duties of 
the Sub-Committee include the 
preparation of the regular examinations 
of monetary policy intentions and their 
implementation as well as the analysis of issues relating 
to the conduct of monetary policies 
in the various stages of EMU. In this context, for instance, 
it holds consultations 
on changes in the definition 
of monetary and credit aggregates 
in the Community and reviews regularly 
developments in the field of monetary policy instruments. 
The Sub-Committee also 
prepares the Governors' annual 
assessments of the Member States' budgetary policies 
and debt 
management. The Bankinn Supervisory Sub-Committee is composed of a senior representative of each Community 
central bank. In the cases where EEC central 
banks do not 
have legal responsibility 
for banking supervision, a senior representative of the respective banking supervisory authority 
- namely, the Belgian 
Banking and Finance Commission, the Danish 
Finanstilsynet and 
the German Bundesaufsichtsamt fur das Kreditwesen 
- also participates in the meetings. The principal task 
of the Sub-Committee 
is to hold 
regular consultations on matters of common interest 
relating to the policies 
and practices of banking 
supervision in the Member States, 
particularly where there is 
a Community-wide dimension. In order to ensure 
effective co-ordination with other supervisory bodies and to avoid unnecessary 
duplication in addressing issues of common interest, the Committee 
liaises with the Basle 
Committee on Banking Supervision, the Banking Advisory 
Committee, and the 
Financial Institutions and Company 
Law Directorate of the Commission of the European 
Communities. For the execution 
of special tasks, the Committee of Governors has, at times, created 
ad hoc working groups. At present, issues of 
direct concern for central 
banks in the field of payment systems 
are being studied 
by such a special working 
group. The Secretariat 
of the Committee of 
Governors provides all secretarial services to the 
Committee itself, the Committee of Alternates and the 
sub-committees, as well 
as to the Board 
of Governors of the European Monetary Co-operation 
Fund (EMCF). In July 1990, an Economic Unit was added to the 
existing Secretariat. The principal task of 
the Economic Unit is to provide 
analytical support 
to the 
work of the Committee 
of Governors. The Secretariat and 
the Economic Unit, which are both headed 
by the Secretary 
General of the Committee, are 
independent in their work from 
any other national 
or international 
institution or government. 
The staff is 
composed of nationals from 
the Member States 
who are in most cases 
seconded from national central 
banks or international institutions. 
The number 
of staff is currently 
nineteen. The Secretariat 
is based within the 
Bank for International 
Settlements, which also provides technical 
and logistical 
support to the Committee of Governors. The expenses incurred 
by the Committee of 
Governors are shared out among 
the central 
banks in proportion to their quotas in the short-term monetary 
support facility. 
CURRENCIES ECU BEF DKK DEM GRD ESP FRF IEP 
ITL NLG PTE GBP USD JPY Belgium Denmark Germany Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom United States of America Japan European Currency Unit 
BelgianlLuxembourg franc Danish krone Deutsche Mark 
Greek drachma 
Spanish peseta French franc Irish pound Italian lira Dutch guilder Portuguese escudo Pound sterling 
US dollar Japanese yen OTHER ABBREVIATIONS BIS Bank for International Settlements 
EEC European Economic Community 
(12 Member States) 
ERM Exchange Rate Mechanism (all EEC Member 
States participate except 
Greece and Portugal) Narrow ERM Narrow band of the ERM (all EEC Member 
States participate except Greece, Spain, 
Portugal and the 
United Kingdom) GDP Gross Domestic 
Product GNP Gross National Product 
OECD Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development 1 Figures for 
the EEC, the ERM, and the ERM narrow band are weighted averages. 2 In accordance with Community practice, countries 
are listed in the Report using 
the alphabetical order of the national languages, as shown above. ANNEXES ANNEX I : Revised mandate of the Committee of Governors ANNEX 11 : Harmonisation of broad monetary aggregates ANNEX 111 : The Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank ANNEX IV : The Statute of the European Monetary Institute Annex I COUNCIL DECISION 
of 12th March 1990 amendin~ Council Decision 
6413001EEC on co-operation between the 
central banks of the Member States 
of the European Economic 
Community THE COUNCIL 
OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing 
the European Economic Community, and in particular to Article 105(1) and to the 
first indent 
of Article 145 thereof, Having regard to the 
recommendation from 
the Commission, Having regard to the 
opinion of the 
European parliamentL, 2Having regard to the 
opinion of the Economic 
and Social Committee , Whereas the European Council, at its meeting 
in Madrid on 26th and 27th June 1989, decided that 
the first stage 
of the 
realisation of economic and monetary union should begin on 1st 
July 1990; Whereas Article 
102a of the Treaty together 
with the realisation of the first stage of the economic and monetary union call for 
an increased degree of convergence in economic performance towards 
non-inflationary growth and of economic and social cohesion 
between the Member States; Whereas greater convergence 
should be promoted with a view to achieving domestic 
price stability, which is at the same time 
a necessary condition for 
stable exchange rates, in accordance with the requirements of the European Monetary System; Whereas the realisation of the first stage of economic and monetary union will 
focus on completing the internal market 
and in particular on removing all 
obstacles to financial integration, on strengthening the process of co-ordination of monetary policies, on 
intensifying co-operation between central banks on other matters 
falling within their competence 
and whereas, in this connection, consideration should be given to extending the 
scope of the central banks' autonomy; Whereas arrangements 
for the formulation of monetary policy within the framework 
of an economic and monetary union 
should provide 
for adequate autonomy 
for the institutions and for commitment to 
price stability, which 
is essential 
to the success of that union; Whereas, in view of the 
objective of the progressive realisation of economic and monetary union, the tasks should 
be extended and the tasks 
1 Official Journal 
of the European Communities 
No. C68, 19.3.1990. 2 Official Journal 
of the European Communities 
No. C56, 7.3.1990, p.47. Annex I and role 
of the Committee 
of Governors 
of the Central Banks of the Member States of the European 
Economic Community should 
be reinforced; 3 Whereas Decision 
6413001EEC should be amended in consequence, HAS DECIDED AS 
FOLLOWS: Sole Article Decision 64/300/EEC is amended as follows: 1. Article 2 is replaced by the following: "Article 2 The Committee 
shall be composed of the 
Governors of the Central Banks of the 
Member States and 
the Director-General of the Luxembourg 
Monetary Institute. If they are unable to attend, 
they may nominate another 
representative of 
their institution. 
The Commission shall, 
as a 
general rule, 
be invited to send one 
of its members 
as a representative 
to the 
meetings of the Committee. 
The Committee may, furthermore, if it considers it necessary, 
invite qualified 
persons to attend and in particular the chairman 
of the monetary committee." 2. The following 
Article is inserted: "Article 2a The chairman 
of the Committee shall be invited to participate in 
the meetings of the 
Council of Ministers 
whenever it deals with-issues involving the tasks of the Committee of Governors." 
3. Article 3 is replaced by the following: 
"Article 3 The tasks 
of the Committee shall 
be: (1) to hold consultations concerning 
the general principles and the broad lines of monetary policy, in particular as regards 
credit, the money and foreign 
exchange markets as 
well as issues falling within the competence of the central banks and affecting 
the stability of financial 
institutions and 
markets; (2) to exchange information 
regularly about the most important measures that fall within 
the competence of 
the central banks, 
and to 
examine those measures. The 
Committee shall normally 
be consulted before the 
national authorities 
take decisions on the course of monetary 
policy, such as the setting 
of annual money supply and credit targets; 
(3) to promote the 
co-ordination of the 
monetary policies 
of the Member States 
with the aim of achieving price stability as a 
necessary condition for 
the proper functioning of 
the European 
Monetary System 
and the realisation 
of its objective 
of monetary stability; 3 Official Journal 
of the 
European Communities No. 77, 21.5.1964, p.1206/64. Annex I (4) to formulate opinions 
on the overall orientation 
of monetary and exchange rate 
policy as well as on the respective measures 
introduced in individual Member States; (5) to express opinions 
to individual governments and 
the Council of Ministers on policies which might affect the internal 
and external monetary 
situation in the Community 
and, in particular, the functioning 
of the 
European Monetary System. In carrying out its tasks, the Committee shall 
keep under review 
the monetary situation 
and pr6qyscts both inside and outside the Community. The Committee shall prepare an annual report on its activities and on the monetary 
and financial conditions 
in the Community, which 
will be transmitted to the 
European Parliament, 
the Council of Ministers, and the European Council. The President of the Committee may 
be invited to appear before the European Parliament on 
this occasion and also before the 
competent committee 
of the European Parliament 
where the circumstances 
so justify. The Committee 
may authorise its chairman 
to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public." 4. The following Article is 
inserted: "Article 3a The members 
of the Committee, who are the representatives of their institutions, shall act, with respect to their 
activities on the Committee, according to their 
own responsibilities and having due 
regard to Community objectives." 5. Article 5 is replaced by the following: "Article 5 The Committee shall 
adopt its own rules of procedure. It may set up sub-committees and provide its 
own secretariat 
and research services." 
Done at Brussels, 12th March 1990. For the Council 
The President 
A. REYNOLDS Annex I1 Over the last eighteen months, 
Community. central banks and the Economic Unit have worked 
together to improve the consistency of 
national definitions of money stocks. The project has initially 
concentrated on 
broad money aggregates, which 
are used as intermediate monetary 
targets or as a key monetary indicator in most Community countries. 
Narrow monetary aggregates may 
be examined more closely at a later 
stage; however, 
a preliminary survey 
has indicated that their definitions 
are already quite 
similar across Community countries. 
The starting point 
for the harmonisation project was to 
select the national measures 
of broad money which seemed to be closest in statistical content. Even though 
their names vary the 
definitions proved to be already reasonably 
similar in most 
cases.' In addition to assets 
included in narrow aggregates (typically those 
used as an immediate means of payment), 
broad aggregates generally incorporate other 
"liquid assets", which are close 
substitutes for a means of payment either because 
they have a short 
maturity or because 
they can be easily transformed 
into a means of payment at little cost 
or risk of loss. Certain discrepancies were identified, however, 
in the asset composition and 
in other aspects, such as 
currency denomination, of the 
national definitions. Nevertheless, 
given the differences in financial structure and behaviour across Community countries, it was 
felt that full 
harmonisation, in the sense of a mechanical 
elimination of all statistical discrepancies, would have 
been inappropriate. 
Rather, the characteristics 
of assets which are, 
or could be, included 
in national definitions 
had to be examined carefully 
on a case-by-case basis in order to assess their 
relevance in practice. Furthermore, due 
regard had 
to be paid to the need 
to preserve the economic 
properties which render monetary 
aggregates useful in the conduct of monetary policy. Among these 
properties, priority was given to the stability of the link between money and 
the final 
goals. The 
importance of controllability 
was less clear, since the process of European financial integration, 
together with the objective of 
exchange rate 
stability, is gradually weakening the scope to control monetary growth at 
the national level. The economic properties 
of the broad 
aggregates chosen as a starting point 
for the harmonisation 
exercise served as benchmarks when assessing alternative 
statistical definitions. Econometric analysis showed that for most 
countries the 
selected definitions have exhibited a fairly 
stable and predictable link 
with nominal income and interest rates over 
the 1980s. Following economic and statistical analysis of 
possible alternatives for national aggregates, 
recommendations for changes 
in definition have been 
put forward. In some cases, they are being embodied 
in official national definitions; 
in others, for 
the time 
being, they will only be implemented for the internal purposes of the 
Committee of Governors, as further analysis 
may be needed. Once 
the proposed changes have been implemented, 
the definitions of 
broad money will 
be sufficiently similar across the Community 
- in terms of asset composition, 
currency denomination and sectoral definition - to facilitate both 
the direct 1 Aggregates selected were M3 in Belgium, Germany, France, 
the Netherlands, Greece and Ireland, 
M2 in Italy, Denmark and Luxembourg, 
M4 in the United Kingdom, ALP 
in Spain, and L- in Portugal. Annex I1 comparison of developments in national money 
stocks and the aggregation of the latter into monetary 
indicators for the area as 
a whole. After harmonisation, 
the aggregates under review 
display the following characteristics: (a) Asset composition 
The aggregates include 
the following monetary 
assets: notes, coins and sight deposits, as well as 
savings deposits, deposits 
at notice and fixed-time deposits, 
except those above certain maturity thresholds in 
a few countries. This latter difference is relatively 
minor in practice since, in the countries where thresholds are not used, assets are 
mostly short-term, and, where 
thresholds are used, 
the excluded 
assets have 
obvious non-monetary features, 
such as a 
very long maturity or 
a high cost of conversion into 
a liquid 
asset. Criteria based on the notions 
of liquidity and 
substitutability with other assets were applied to assess the desirability of including such 
assets as negotiable certificates, 
repurchase agreements 
between banks and 
non-banks (irrespective 
of the asset used as 
collateral), short-term bank bonds, and non-negotiable certificates. (b) Currency 
denomination and cross-border holdings 
To comply with the current practice of 
most Community countries, 
monetary aggregates 
should include 
assets, held by domestic residents, 
independently of whether they 
are denominated in domestic or foreign currency. Data on holdings of those assets are readily available 
when they are the liabilities 
of domestically-located intermediaries. 
However, given 
the increasing importance 
of cross-border 
holdings by non-financial residents, "extended national measures"which include these holdings will 
be used as auxiliary indicators 
according to the availability 
of statistical information. (C) Sectoral definition As long as 
financial structures and behaviour differ, the sectoral definition of money 
"issuers" and "holders" across the Community should take country-specific 
features into account. As a result, no common 
definition of these sectors 
can be put forward. However, as 
a general principle, all monetary liabilities of 
the (domestically-located) financial 
institutions which operate as banks should be included. The resulting aggregate is taken as 
the principal monetary indicator and, 
at present, is 
termed "M3H"for the internal purposes of the 
Committee of Governors. A 
wider concept, called internally 
"M4Hn, is also 
monitored. In addition to the instruments included in M3H, this broader 
concept consists 
of those 
liabilities of 
the non-financial sector which are highly 
substitutable for the components of 
M3H (mainly Government 
short-term paper and corporate 
commercial paper). Annex I11 TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNION AS SIGNED ON 7TH FEBRUARY 
1992 PROTOCOL ON THE 
STATUTE OF 
THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF 
CENTRAL BANKS AND OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL 
BANK THE HIGH CONTRACTING 
PARTIES, DESIRING to lay down the Statute of the European System 
of Central Banks and of the European Central 
Bank provided 
for in Article 4a of the Treaty establishing the European Community, HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, which 
shall be annexed to the Treaty establishing the European Community: 
CHAPTER I - CONSTITUTION OF THE 
ESCB ARTICLE 1 - The European System of Central Banks 
1.1 The European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the European Central Bank (ECB) shall be established in accordance with Article 4a 
of this Treaty; they shall perform 
their tasks and carry on their activities in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty 
and of this Statute. 1.2 In accordance with Article 106(1) of this Treaty, the ESCB shall be composed of the ECB and of the central 
banks of the 
Member States ("national central banks"). The 
Institut monetaire luxembourgeois will 
be the central bank of Luxembourg. CHAPTER I1 - OBJECTIVES AND TASKS OF 
THE ESCB ARTICLE 2 - Objectives In accordance with Article 105(1) of this Treaty, the primary objective of the ESCB shall 
be to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to the objective of price stability, it shall support the general economic policies in the Community with a 
view to contributing to the achievement 
of the objectives of the Community as laid down in Article 2 of this Treaty. 
The ESCB 
shall act 
in accordance with the principle of an open market economy with free competition, favouring 
an efficient allocation of resources, and in compliance with the principles 
set out in Article 3a of this Treaty. 
ARTICLE 3 - Tasks 3.1 In accordance with Article 
105(2) of this Treaty, the basic tasks to be carried out 
through the ESCB shall be: - to define 
and implement the monetary policy 
of the Community; - to conduct foreign 
exchange operations consistent 
with the provisions of Article 109 of this Treaty; - to hold and manage the official foreign reserves 
of the Member States; - to promote the smooth operation 
of payment systems. 
Annex I11 3.2 In accordance with Article 105(3) of this Treaty, the 
third indent of Article 3.1 shall be without prejudice to the holding 
and management by the governments 
of Member States 
of foreign exchange working 
balances. 3.3 In accordance with Article 105(5) of this Treaty, the 
ESCB shall contribute 
to the smooth conduct 
of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities relating to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the 
stability of 
the financial system. ARTICLE 4 - Advisory functions 
In accordance with Article 105(4) of this Treaty: 
a) the ECB shall 
be consulted: - on any proposed Community act in its fields 
of competence; - by national authorities regarding any draft legislative 
provision in its fields 
of competence, but within the limits and under the conditions set 
out by the Council in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42; b) the ECB may submit opinions 
to the appropriate Community institutions or bodies or to national authorities on matters 
in its fields 
of competence. ARTICLE 5 - Collection of statistical information 5.1 In order to 
undertake the tasks of the 
ESCB, the ECB, assisted by the national central banks, 
shall collect the 
necessary statistical 
information either 
from the competent 
national authorities 
or directly from 
economic agents. For these 
purposes it shall co-operate with the Community institutions or bodies and 
with the competent authorities 
of the 
Member States or third 
countries and with international organisations. 
5.2 The national central banks shall 
carry out, to 
the extent possible, the tasks 
described in Article 5.1. 5.3 The ECB 
shall contribute 
to the 
harmonisation, where necessary, of the rules 
and practices governing 
the collection, compilation 
and distribution of statistics 
in the areas within its fields 
of competence. 5.4 The Council, in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
Article 42, shall define 
the natural and legal persons subject to reporting requirements, the confidentiality regime and the 
appropriate provisions for enforcement. ARTICLE 6 - International co-operation 
6.1 In the field 
of international co-operation involving the 
tasks entrusted to the ESCB, the 
ECB shall 
decide how the ESCB shall 
be represented. 6.2 The ECB and, 
subject to its approval, the national central 
banks may participate in international monetary institutions. 
6.3 Articles 6.1 and 6.2 shall be without prejudice 
to Article 109(4) of this Treaty. Annex I11 CHAPTER I11 - ORGANISATION OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 7 - Independence In accordance with Article 107 of this 
Treaty, when exercising the powers 
and carrying out 
the tasks and 
duties conferred 
upon them by this Treaty 
and this Statute, neither the ECB 
nor a national central bank, 
nor any member 
of their decision-making bodies shall seek or take 
instructions from Community institutions or 
bodies, from any government 
of a Member State 
or from any other 
body. The Community institutions and bodies and 
the governments 
of the 
Member States undertake 
to respect this principle and not to 
seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the 
ECB or of 
the national central 
banks in the performance of their tasks. 
ARTICLE 8 - General principle 
The ESCB shall 
be governed by the decision-making bodies of the ECB . ARTICLE 9 - The European Central Bank 
9.1 The ECB which, 
in accordance with Article 106(2) of this 
Treaty, shall have legal 
personality, shall enjoy 
in each of 
the Member States the most 
extensive legal capacity accorded to legal 
persons under 
its law; it may, in 
particular, acquire or 
dispose of movable and immovable 
property and may 
be a party to legal proceedings. 
9.2 The ECB shall ensure 
that the 
tasks conferred upon 
the ESCB 
under Article 
105(2), (3) and (5) of this Treaty 
are implemented either by its own activities 
pursuant to this 
Statute or 
through the national central banks pursuant 
to Articles 12.1 
and 14. 9.3 In accordance with Article 106(3) of this 
Treaty, the decision-making bodies of 
the ECB 
shall be the Governing 
Council and the 
Executive Board. ARTICLE 10 - The Governing Council 
10.1 In accordance with 
Article 109a(l) of this 
Treaty, the Governing Council shall 
comprise the members of 
the Executive Board of the ECB and the Governors of the national central banks. 10.2 Subject to 
Article 10.3, only 
members of the 
Governing Council 
present in person shall have 
the right to 
vote. By way of derogation from 
this rule, the Rules 
of Procedure referred 
to in Article 12.3 
may lay down that members of the Governing 
Council may cast their 
vote by means of teleconferencing. These rules 
shall also provide that a 
member of the Governing Council 
who is prevented from voting for a prolonged 
period may appoint an alternate as a member 
of the Governing Council. Subject to 
Articles 10.3 and 11.3, each member 
of the 
Governing Council shall have one 
vote. Save as otherwise provided 
for in this Statute, the Governing Council 
shall act by a simple majority. 
In the event 
of a 
tie, the President 
shall have the casting vote. In order for 
the Governing Council to vote, there shall 
be a quorum of two-thirds 
of the members. If the quorum is not 
met, the President may convene an extraordinary meeting at which decisions may 
be taken without 
regard to the quorum. 
Annex I11 10.3 For any 
decisions to be taken under Articles 
28, 29, 30, 32, 33 and 51, the votes 
in the Governing Council shall be weighted according to 
the national central 
banks' shares in the subscribed 
capital of the ECB. The weights 
of the votes 
of the members of 
the Executive 
Board shall be zero. A decision requiring a qualified 
majority shall 
be adopted if the votes cast in favour represent at least two-thirds of the subscribed capital of the ECB 
and represent at least half 
of the shareholders. If a Governor is unable to 
be present, he may nominate an alternate to cast his weighted vote. 10.4 The proceedings 
of the meetings 
shall be 
confidential. The Governing Council may decide 
to make the outcome of its deliberations 
public. 10.5 The Governing 
Council shall meet at least ten times a year. 
ARTICLE 11 - The Executive Board 11.1 In accordance with Article 109a(2)(a) of this 
Treaty, the Executive Board shall comprise 
the President, the Vice-President 
and four other members. The members 
shall perform their 
duties on a full-time basis. No 
member shall engage 
in any occupation, whether gainful 
or not, unless exemption is 
exceptionally granted 
by the Governing Council. 11.2 In accordance with Article 109a(2)(b) of this 
Treaty, the President, the Vice-President 
and the 
other Members of the 
Executive Board shall be appointed from 
among persons of recognised standing and 
professional experience in monetary or banking matters by common accord of the governments of the 
Member States at the level of the 
Heads of 
State or of Government, on a recommendation from the Council after 
it has consulted the European Parliament and 
the Governing 
Council. Their term 
of office shall be eight years and shall not 
be renewable. Only nationals of Member States may be members of the Executive 
Board. 11.3 The terms and conditions 
of employment of 
the members 
of the Executive Board, 
in particular their 
salaries, pensions and other social security benefits 
shall be the subject of contracts with the ECB and 
shall be fixed by the Governing Council on a proposal 
from the Committee 
comprising three members appointed 
by the Governing Council 
and three 
members appointed 
by the Council. The members of the 
Executive Board shall not have 
the right to 
vote on matters referred 
to in this paragraph. 11.4 If a member of the Executive Board 
no longer fulfils 
the conditions required for the performance of 
his duties 
or if he has been guilty of serious 
misconduct, the Court of Justice may, on 
application by the Governing Council 
or the Executive 
Board, compulsorily retire 
him. 11.5 Each member 
of the Executive 
Board present in person shall have the right to vote and shall have, for 
that purpose, one vote. 
Save as 
otherwise provided, the 
Executive Board shall act 
by a simple 
majority of the votes cast. In the event of a 
tie, the President shall have 
the casting 
vote. The voting 
arrangements shall 
be specified in the Rules of Procedure 
referred to 
in Article 12.3. 11.6 The Executive 
Board shall be 
responsible for the current 
business of the ECB. Annex I11 11.7 Any vacancy 
on the Executive Board shall be 
filled by the appointment of a 
new member in accordance with Article 11.2. ARTICLE 12 - Responsibilities of the decision-making bodies 12.1 The Governing Council 
shall adopt the 
guidelines and take 
the decisions necessary to 
ensure the performance 
of the tasks entrusted to 
the ESCB under this Treaty 
and this 
Statute. The Governing Council 
shall formulate the monetary 
policy of the Community including, as appropriate, decisions relating to intermediate monetary objectives, 
key interest rates and the supply of reserves 
in the ESCB, and shall establish the 
necessary guidelines for their implementation. The Executive 
Board shall implement 
monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines and decisions laid 
down by the Governing 
Council. In doing so 
the Executive 
Board shall give the necessary 
instructions to national 
central banks. In addition the Executive Board may have certain 
powers delegated 
to it 
where the Governing Council so 
decides. To the 
extent deemed possible 
and appropriate and without prejudice to the provisions of 
this Article, the ECB shall 
have recourse 
to the national central 
banks to carry out operations which form 
part of 
the tasks of the ESCB. 12.2 The Executive 
Board shall have responsibility for 
the preparation of meetings of 
the Governing 
Council. 12.3 The Governing 
Council shall 
adopt Rules 
of Procedure which 
determine the internal organisation 
of the ECB and its decision-making 
bodies. 12.4 The Governing 
Council shall exercise the 
advisory functions referred to in Article 4. 12.5 The Governing Council 
shall take 
the decisions 
referred to in Article 6. ARTICLE 13 - The President 
13.1 The President 
or, in his absence, the Vice-President shall chair the Governing Council and 
the Executive Board of the ECB. 13.2 Without prejudice to Article 39, the President or his nominee 
shall represent 
the ECB externally. 
ARTICLE 14 - National central 
banks 14.1 In accordance with 
Article 108 of this 
Treaty, each Member 
State shall ensure, 
at the latest at the date of the establishment 
of the ESCB, that its national legislation, 
including the statutes of 
its national 
central bank, is compatible with 
this Treaty 
and this Statute. 
14.2 The statutes of the 
national central 
banks shall, in particular, provide that 
the term of office of a 
Governor of a 
national central bank shall 
be no less than 
5 years. A Governor may be relieved from office only if he 
no longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of 
his duties or 
if he has been 
guilty of serious misconduct. 
A decision to 
this effect 
may be referred to the Court 
of Justice by the Governor 
concerned or the Governing 
Council on grounds of infringement of this 
Treaty or of any 
rule of law relating to , its application. Such proceedings shall 
be instituted within two months 
of the Annex I11 publication of the decision 
or of its notification to the plaintiff or, in the absence thereof, 
of the day on which it came to 
the knowledge 
of the latter, as 
the case may be. 14.3 The national central banks are an integral part of the ESCB and 
shall act in accordance with the guidelines 
and instructions of the ECB. The Governing Council 
shall take 
the necessary steps to ensure compliance 
with the guidelines and 
instructions of the ECB, and shall require 
that any necessary information 
be given to it. 14.4 National central 
banks may perform functions other 
than those specified in this Statute unless 
the Governing Council 
finds, by a majority of two' thirds 
of the votes cast, that these interfere 
with the objectives 
and tasks of the 
ESCB. Such functions shall be performed 
on the responsibility and liability of national central 
banks and 
shall not be regarded as being part of the 
functions of the ESCB. ARTICLE 15 - Reporting commitments 
15.1 The ECB shall draw up and publish reports 
on the activities 
of the ESCB at least quarterly. 
15.2 A consolidated financial statement of the ESCB 
shall be published each week. 15.3 In accordance with Article 109b(3) of this Treaty, the ECB shall address 
an annual report 
on the activities 
of the ESCB and on the monetary policy of both 
the previous and 
the current year 
to the European 
Parliament, the 
Council and the 
Commission, and also to 
the European Council. 15.4 The reports 
and statements referred 
to in this Article shall be made available to interested parties 
free of charge. 
ARTICLE 16 - Bank notes In accordance with Article 105a(l) of this 
Treaty, the Governing Council shall 
have the exclusive right to 
authorise the issue of bank notes within the Community. 
The ECB 
and the national 
central banks 
may issue such 
notes. The bank 
notes issued by the ECB and the 
national central 
banks shall be the only 
such notes 
to have the status of legal tender 
within the Community. The ECB shall 
respect as far as possible 
existing practices 
regarding the issue and design of bank 
notes. CHAPTER IV - MONETARY FUNCTIONS AND OPERATIONS OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 17 - Accounts with the ECB and the national central 
banks In order to conduct their 
operations, the ECB and the national 
central banks may open accounts 
for credit institutions, 
public entities 
and other market 
participants and accept assets, including book-entry 
securities, as collateral. ARTICLE 18 - Open market and 
credit operations 
18.1 In order to achieve the objectives 
of the ESCB 
and to carry out 
its tasks, 
the ECB and the 
national central 
banks may: Annex I11 - operate in the financial markets 
by buying and selling outright 
(spot and forward) 
or under repurchase 
agreement and 
by lending or borrowing 
claims and marketable 
.instruments, whether in 
Community or in non-Community currencies, as well as precious metals ; - conduct credit 
operations with credit institutions and other 
market participants, with lending being based 
on adequate collateral. 18.2 The ECB 
shall establish general principles 
for open market and credit operations 
carried out by itself or the national central 
banks, including for the announcement 
of conditions under which they stand 
ready to enter 
into such transactions. ARTICLE 19 
- Minimum reserves 19.1 Subject to Article 
2, the ECB may 
require credit institutions 
established in Member States to hold minimum reserves on accounts with the ECB and 
national central 
banks in pursuance of monetary policy objectives. Regulations concerning the 
calculation and determination of the required 
minimum reserves 
may be established 
by the Governing Council. In cases of non-compliance the ECB shall be entitled to 
levy penalty 
interest and to 
impose other sanctions 
with comparable effect. 19.2 For the application 
of this Article, the Council shall, in 
accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42, define the basis 
for minimum reserves and the maximum 
permissible ratios between 
those reserves 
and their basis, as 
well as the appropriate sanctions 
in cases of non-compliance. ARTICLE 20 - Other instruments of 
monetary control The Governing 
Council may, by a majority of 
two thirds of the votes cast, decide upon 
the use of such 
other operational methods 
of monetary control 
as it sees fit, respecting Article 
2. The Council shall, 
in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 42, define the scope 
of such methods if 
they impose obligations on third parties. ARTICLE 21 - Operations with public entities 
21.1 In accordance with Article 104 of this 
Treaty, overdrafts 
or any other 
type of 
credit facility with the ECB or 
with the national central 
banks in favour of Community institutions or bodies, 
central governments, 
regional, local or other 
public authorities, other bodies governed 
by public law or public undertakings of 
Member States shall be prohibited, as 
shall the purchase directly from 
them by the ECB or national central 
banks of debt instruments. 21.2 The 
ECB and national 
central banks may act as fiscal agents for 
the entities referred to 
in Article 21.1. 21.3 The provisions of this Article shall 
not apply to publicly-owned credit institutions which, in the context of the supply 
of reserves by central banks, 
shall be given the 
same treatment by national central banks and the ECB 
as private credit institutions. 
Annex I11 ARTICLE 22 - Clearing and payment systems The ECB and national 
central banks may provide facilities, 
and the ECB may issue regulations, 
to ensure efficient 
and sound clearing and 
payment systems within 
the Community and 
with other countries. 
ARTICLE 23 - External operations 
The ECB and national 
central banks 
may: - establish relations with central banks 
and financial 
institutions in other countries 
and, where appropriate, with international organisations; 
- acquire and sell spot and forward 
all types 
of foreign exchange assets and precious 
metals; the term "foreign exchange asset" 
shall include 
securities and 
all other assets in the currency of any 
country or units of 
account and 
in whatever form held; 
- hold and 
manage the assets referred 
to in this Article; - conduct all 
types of 
banking transactions in relations with third countries 
and international organisations, including borrowing and lending operations. 
ARTICLE 24 - Other operations 
In addition to operations arising 
from their tasks, the ECB and 
the national central 
banks may enter into operations for 
their administrative purposes or for 
their staff. CHAPTER V - PRUDENTIAL SUPERVISION 
ARTICLE 25 - Prudential supervision 
25.1 The ECB may offer advice to and 
be consulted 
by the Council, 
the Commission and 
the competent authorities of 
the Member States 
on the scope and implementation 
of Community 
legislation relating 
to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions and to 
the stability of the financial system. 25.2 In accordance with any decision 
of the 
Council under 
Article 105(6) of this Treaty, 
the ECB may perform specific tasks 
concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and other financial 
institutions with the exception of insurance undertakings. CWTER V1 - FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 26 - Financial accounts 
26.1 The financial year 
of the ECB and the national central 
banks shall begin on 
the first day of January and end on the last day 
of December. 26.2 The annual accounts 
of the ECB shall be drawn up 
by the Executive Board, 
in accordance with the principles established 
by the Governing Council. The accounts 
shall be approved by the Governing Council and 
shall thereafter 
be published. 26.3 For analytical and 
operational purposes, the Executive 
Board shall draw up a consolidated balance sheet of 
the ESCB, comprising 
those Annex I11 assets and liabilities 
of the 
national central 
banks that fall within 
the ESCB . 26.4 For the application of this 
Article, the Governing Council shall establish the necessary 
rules for standardising 
the accounting and reporting of operations undertaken 
by the national central banks. ARTICLE 27 - Auditing 27.1 The accounts 
of the ECB 
and national central 
banks shall 
be audited by independent external auditors recommended 
by the Governing Council and 
approved by the Council. 
The auditors shall 
have full power to examine 
all books and 
accounts of the 
ECB and 
national central 
banks and obtain full information about their transactions. 
27.2 The provisions 
of Article 188b of this Treaty 
shall only 
apply to an examination of the 
operational efficiency 
of the management 
of the ECB . ARTICLE 28 - Capital of the ECB 28.1 The capital 
of the ECB, which 
shall become operational upon its establishment, shall 
be ECU 5,000 million. The capital 
may be increased by such amounts as may be decided by the Governing Council acting 
by the qualified majority provided 
for in Article 10.3, within the limits and under the conditions set by the Council under the procedure laid 
down in Article 42. 28.2 The national central 
banks shall 
be the sole 
subscribers to and 
holders of the 
capital of the ECB. The subscription 
of capital shall 
be according to 
the key established in accordance with Article 29. 28.3 The Governing 
Council, acting by the qualified majority provided for in Article 10.3, shall determine 
the extent to 
which and the form in which the capital shall 
be paid up. 28.4 Subject to Article 
28.5, the shares of 
the national central banks in the subscribed capital 
of the ECB may 
not be transferred, pledged or attached. 
28.5 If the key 
referred to in Article 29 is adjusted, the 
national central banks shall transfer 
among themselves capital shares to the extent 
necessary to ensure that the distribution of capital shares corresponds to 
the adjusted key. The Governing Council shall determine 
the terms and conditions 
of such transfers. ARTICLE 29 - Key for capital subscription 
29.1 When in accordance with the 
procedure referred to in Article 1091(1) of this Treaty the ESCB and the 
ECB have been 
established, the key for 
subscription of the 
ECB's capital shall 
be established. Each 
national central bank shall be assigned a weighting 
in this key which 
shall be equal to 
the sum of: - 50% of 
the share of its respective Member State 
in the population of the 
Community in the penultimate year 
preceding the establishment 
of the ESCB; - 50% of 
the share 
of its 
respective Member State 
in the gross 
domestic product at market prices of 
the Community as recorded Annex I11 in the last five 
years preceding 
the penultimate 
year before the establishment of 
the ESCB; The percentages shall be rounded 
up to the nearest multiple 
of 0.05% points. 29.2 The statistical 
data to be used for the application of this 
Article shall be 
provided by the Commission 
in accordance with the rules 
adopted by the Council under 
the procedure provided 
for in Article 42. 29.3 The weightings 
assigned to the 
national central 
banks shall 
be adjusted every five years after the 
establishment of the ESCB 
by analogy with the provisions laid down in Article 29.1. The adjusted key shall apply 
with effect from the first day 
of the following year. 
29.4 The Governing Council 
shall take 
all other measures necessary 
for the application 
of this Article. 
ARTICLE 30 - Transfer of foreign reserve assets 
to the ECB 
30.1 Without prejudice to Article 28, the ECB shall 
be provided 
by the national central 
banks with foreign reserve assets, other than Member 
States' currencies, ECUs, IMF reserve positions and SDRs, up to an amount equivalent to ECU 50,000 million. The Governing Council shall decide upon 
the proportion to be called 
up by the ECB following its establishment 
and the amounts called up at later dates. The ECB 
shall have the full right to hold 
and manage the foreign reserves that are 
transferred to it and to use them for 
the purposes set out 
in this Statute. 30.2 The contributions of each national central 
bank shall be fixed in proportion to its 
share in the subscribed capital of the 
ECB. 30.3 Each national central 
bank shall be credited by the ECB with a claim equivalent to 
its contribution. 
The Governing 
Council shall determine 
the denomination 
and remuneration of such claims. 30.4 Further calls 
of foreign reserve assets beyond the 
limit set in Article 30.1 may be effected by the ECB, in accordance with Article 30.2, within the limits and 
under the conditions set 
by the Council in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42. 30.5 The ECB may 
hold and manage IMF reserve positions and SDRs and provide for the pooling 
of such assets. 30.6 The Governing Council shall 
take all other measures necessary 
for the application 
of this Article. 
ARTICLE 31 - Foreign reserve assets held by national central banks 
31.1 The national 
central banks shall be allowed to perform 
transactions in fulfilment of their 
obligations towards international 
organisations in accordance with Article 23. 31.2 All other operations in foreign reserve assets remaining 
with the national central 
banks after the transfers referred 
to in Article 30, and Member 
States' transactions with their foreign exchange working 
balances shall, above 
a certain limit to 
be established 
within the framework of Article 31.3, 
be subject 
to approval by the ECB 
in order to Annex I11 ensure consistency 
with the exchange rate and monetary 
policies of the Community. 31.3 The Governing 
Council shall 
issue gu'idelines with a view to facilitating such 
operations. ARTICLE 32 - Allocation of monetary income of national central banks 
32.1 The income 
accruing to the national central 
banks in the performance of the 
ESCB's monetary policy function (hereinafter referred 
to as "monetary 
income") shall be allocated at the end of 
each financial 
year in accordance with the provisions 
of this 
Article. 32.2 Subject to Article 32.3, 
the amount of 
each national 
central bank's monetary income 
shall be equal 
to its annual income derived from 
its assets held against notes 
in circulation and deposit liabilities to credit institutions. These assets shall 
be earmarked by national central 
banks in accordance with guidelines to 
be established by the Governing Council. 32.3 If, after the start 
of the third stage, the balance sheet 
structures of the national central 
banks do not, in the judgement of the 
Governing Council, 
permit the application of Article 
32.2, the Governing Council, acting 
by a qualified 
majority, may decide that, by way 
of derogation from Article 32.2, monetary income shall be 
measured according to an alternative method for 
a period of not more than five 
years. 32.4 The amount 
of each national central bank's monetary income shall be reduced 
by an amount equivalent to any interest paid by that central bank on its deposit 
liabilities to credit institutions in accordance with Article 19. The Governing Council 
may decide that national central 
banks shall be indemnified against costs 
incurred in connection with the issue of bank notes or 
in exceptional circumstances 
for specific losses arising from 
monetary policy operations undertaken for the ESCB. Indemnification shall be in a form deemed appropriate in the judgement of the Governing Council; 
these amounts may be offset against 
the national central 
banks' monetary income. 32.5 The sum 
of the national central banks' monetary income shall be allocated to the national 
central banks in proportion to their paid-up 
shares in the capital 
of the ECB, 
subject to any decision taken 
by the Governing Council 
pursuant to Article 33.2. 32.6 The clearing 
and settlement of the balances 
arising from the allocation of monetary income 
shall be carried out 
by the ECB in accordance with guidelines established by the Governing 
Council. 32.7 The Governing 
Council shall take 
all other measures necessary 
for the application of this 
Article. ARTICLE 33 - Allocation of net 
profits and losses of the 
ECB 33.1 The net profit of the ECB shall 
be transferred in the following 
order : (a) an amount to 
be determined 
by the Governing Council, which 
may not exceed 20% of the net profit, shall 
be transferred to the general reserve 
fund subject 
to a limit equal to 100% of the capital ; (b) the remaining net 
profit shall be distributed to the shareholders of the ECB in proportion to their paid-up shares. Annex I11 33.2 In the event of a loss incurred 
by the ECB, the shortfall may 
be offset against the general 
reserve fund 
of the ECB and, if necessary, following a decision by the Governing Council, against the monetary 
income of the relevant financial year 
in proportion and up to the amounts 
allocated to the national central 
banks in accordance with Article 32.5. CHAPTER V11 - GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 34 - Legal acts 
34.1 In accordance with Article 108a of this Treaty, the ECB shall: - make regulations 
to the extent necessary to implement the tasks defined in Article 3.1, 
first indent, Articles 19.1, 
22 or 25.2 and in cases which shall be laid down in the acts of the 
Council referred to in Article 42; - take decisions necessary 
for carrying out 
the tasks 
entrusted to the ESCB under this 
Treaty and 
this Statute; - make recommendations and deliver opinions. 
34.2 A regulation shall have general 
application. It shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable 
in all Member 
States. Recommendations and opinions shall 
have no binding force. 
A decision shall 
be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed. Articles 190 to 192 of this Treaty shall apply 
to regulations and decisions adopted by the ECB. The ECB may decide 
to publish 
its decisions, recommendations 
and opinions. 
34.3 Within the limits 
and under the 
conditions adopted by the Council under the 
procedure laid down in Article 42, the ECB shall be entitled to 
impose fines or 
periodic penalty payments 
on undertakings for failure to comply with obligations under its regulations 
and decisions. ARTICLE 35 - Judicial control 
and related matters 35.1 The acts or 
omissions of the ECB shall be open to review or interpretation by the Court of Justice in the cases and under the conditions laid down in this Treaty. The ECB 
may institute proceedings in the cases and 
under the conditions laid 
down in this Treaty. 35.2 Disputes between 
the ECB, on 
the one 
hand, and its creditors, 
debtors or any other 
person, on the other, shall be decided by the competent national 
courts, save where jurisdiction has been 
conferred upon the Court of Justice. 35.3 The ECB shall 
be subject to the liability regime provided for 
in Article 215 of this Treaty. The national central banks shall be liable according 
to their 
respective national 
laws. 35.4 The Court 
of Justice shall have jurisdiction to give judgement pursuant to any 
arbitration clause contained 
in a contract concluded 
by or on behalf of the 
ECB, whether that contract be governed by public or private law. 35.5 A decision of the ECB to bring 
an action before the Court of Justice shall 
be taken by the Governing Council. 
Annex I11 35.6 The Court of Justice shall 
have jurisdiction 
in disputes concerning the fulfilment by a national central 
bank of obligations under this Statute. 
If the ECB considers that a national central 
bank has failed to fulfil an obligation under this Statute, it shall deliver 
a reasoned opinion on the matter after giving the 
national central 
bank concerned 
the opportunity to submit its observations. 
If the national central bank concerned does not comply with the opinion within the period laid 
down by the ECB, the latter may 
bring the matter before the Court of Justice. ARTICLE 36 - Staff 36.1 The 
Governing Council, on a 
proposal from the Executive Board, shall lay 
down the conditions of employment of the 
staff of the 
ECB. 36.2 The 
Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction 
in any dispute 
between the ECB 
and its servants 
within the limits and under the conditions laid down in the conditions of employment. ARTICLE 37 - Seat Before the 
end of 
1992, the decision as to where the seat 
of the ECB will be established shall 
be taken by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the 
level of Heads of State or of Government. ARTICLE 38 - Professional secrecy 38.1 Members of the governing bodies 
and the staff of the ECB and the national central 
banks shall be required, even 
after their duties 
have ceased, not to disclose information 
of the kind covered 
by the obligation of professional secrecy. 38.2 Persons having access 
to data covered by Community legislation 
imposing an obligation of secrecy shall 
be subject to such legislation. 
ARTICLE 39 - Signatories The ECB shall 
be legally committed to third parties 
by the President or by two members 
of the 
Executive Board or by the signatures of two members of the 
staff of the ECB who have been 
duly authorised by the President to sign 
on behalf of the ECB. ARTICLE 40 - Privileges and immunities The ECB 
shall enjoy in the territories of the Member States 
such privileges and immunities as are necessary for 
the performance 
of its tasks, under the 
conditions laid down in the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities annexed to the Treaty 
establishing a Single Council 
and a Single Commission 
of the European Communities. 
CHAPTER V111 - AMENDMENT OF 
THE STATUTE AND COMPLEMENTARY LEGISLATION 
ARTICLE 41 - Simplified amendment 
procedure 41.1 In accordance with Article 106(5) of this Treaty, Articles 5.1, 
5.2, 5.3, 17, 18, 19.1, 22, 23, 
24, 26, 32.2, 32.3, 32.4, 32.6, 
33.l(a) and 36 of this Statute may 
be amended by the Council, acting either 
by a qualified majority 
on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting 
Annex 111 the Commission, or unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the ECB. In either case 
the assent of the European Parliament 
shall be required. 41.2 A recommendation made 
by the ECB under this Article shall require a unanimous decision 
by the Governing Council. ARTICLE 42 - Complementary legislation 
In accordance with Article 106(6) of this Treaty, immediately after the decision on the date for the beginning of the third 
stage, the Council, acting by a qualified majority either on a 
proposal from the Commission and after consulting 
the European Parliament 
and the ECB, or on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting the European Parliament 
and the 
Commission, shall adopt the provisions referred to in Articles 4, 5.4, 19.2, 20, 28.1, 29.2, 30.4 and 
34.3 of this Statute. CHAPTER IX - TRANSITIONAL AND OTHER PROVISIONS FOR 
THE ESCB ARTICLE 43 - General provisions 43.1 A derogation as referred 
to in Article 109k(l) of this Treaty 
shall entail that the following 
Articles of this Statute shall not confer any rights or impose any obligations 
on the Member State concerned: 
3, 6, 9.2, 12.1, 14.3, 
16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 
26.2, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 
50 and 52. 
43.2 The central banks of Member States 
with a derogation as 
specified in Article 109k(l) of this Treaty shall 
retain their powers 
in the field of monetary policy according 
to national law. 43.3 In accordance with Article 109k(4) of this 
Treaty, "Member 
Statesn shall be read as "Member States without a derogation" in the following Articles 
of this Statute: 
3, 11.2, 19, 34.2 and 50. 43.4 "National central banks" 
shall be read as "central 
banks of Member States without 
a derogationn in 
the following Articles 
of this Statute: 9.2, 10.1, 10.3, 12.1, 16, 17, 18, 
22, 23, 27, 30, 31, 
32, 33.2 and 52. 43.5 "Shareholders" shall be read as "central banks of Member States without a derogation" in 
Articles 10.3 and 33.1. 43.6 "Subscribed capital 
of the ECB" shall be read as "capital 
of the ECB 
subscribed by the central banks of Member States without 
a derogationn in Articles 10.3 and 
30.2. ARTICLE 44 - Transitional tasks 
of the 
ECB The ECB shall take over 
those tasks of 
the EM1 which, because of the derogations of one or more Member States, still have to be performed in the third stage. 
The ECB shall give 
advice in the preparations for 
the abrogation of the derogations specified in Article 1091 of this Treaty. 
ARTICLE 45 - The General Council of the ECB 
45.1 Without prejudice to Article 106(3) of this Treaty, the General Council shall be constituted as a third decision-making body of the ECB. Annex I11 45.2 The General Council 
shall comprise the President and Vice-President of the ECB and the 
Governors of 
t.he national central 
banks. The other members 
of the Executive Board may participate, without having the right to vote, 
in meetings of the General Council. 45.3 The responsibilities 
of the General Council are 
listed in full in Article 47 of this Statute. ARTICLE 46 - Rules of procedure of the General Council 46.1 The President 
or, in his absence, the Vice-President of the ECB 
shall chair the 
General Council of the ECB. 46.2 The President 
of the Council and a member 
of the 
Commission may participate, without having the right 
to vote, in 
meetings of the General Council. 46.3 The President 
shall prepare the 
meetings of the 
General Council. 46.4 By 
way of derogation from Article 
12.3, the 
General Council 
shall adopt its Rules 
of Procedure. 
46.5 The Secretariat of the General Council shall 
be provided by the ECB . ARTICLE 47 - Responsibilities of the General Council 
47.1 The General Council 
shall: - perform the tasks referred 
to in Article 44; - contribute to the advisory 
functions referred to in Articles 4 
and 25.1. 47.2 The 
General Council shall contribute to: - the collection 
of statistical information as referred to in 
Article 5; - the reporting activities of the ECB 
as referred to in Article 15; - the establishment 
of the necessary rules for the application of Article 26 as referred to in Article 26.4; - the taking of all other measures 
necessary for the application of Article 29 as referred to in Article 29.4; - the laying down of the conditions of employment of the staff of the ECB as referred to in Article 36. 47.3 The General Council shall contribute to the necessary 
preparations for irrevocably fixing 
the exchange rates 
of the 
currencies of Member States with a derogation against 
the currencies, or the single 
currency, of the Member States without a derogation, 
as referred to in Article 1091(5) of this Treaty. 47.4 The General Council 
shall be informed by the President of the ECB of decisions of the 
Governing Council. ARTICLE 48 - Transitional provisions for the capital 
of the ECB 
In accordance with Article 29.1 each national central 
bank shall be assigned a weighting 
in the key for 
subscription of the ECB's capital. By 
way of derogation from Article 28.3, central banks of 
Member States with a derogation shall not 
pay up their subscribed capital unless 
the General Council, 
acting by a majority representing at least two thirds 
Annex I11 of the subscribed 
capital of the ECB and at least half 
of the shareholders, 
decides that 
a minimal percentage has 
to be paid up as a contribution to the operational costs 
of the 
ECB. ARTICLE 49 - Deferred payment of capital, reserves and provisions 
of the ECB 49.1 The central 
bank of 
a Member State whose derogation has 
been abrogated shall pay up its subscribed share of the 
capital of the ECB 
to the same extent as the 
central banks of other Member States without 
a derogation, and 
shall transfer 
to the ECB 
foreign reserve assets 
in accordance with Article 30.1. The sum 
to be transferred shall be determined by multiplying the ECU value 
at current exchange 
rates of the 
foreign reserve assets 
which have already been transferred 
to the ECB 
in accordance with Article 30.1, 
by the ratio between 
the number 
of shares subscribed 
by the national central 
bank concerned 
and the number of shares 
already paid up by the other national central 
banks. 49.2 In addition to 
the payment 
to be made in accordance with Article 49.1, the central bank concerned 
shall contribute to the 
reserves of the ECB, 
to those provisions equivalent 
to reserves, and to 
the amount still to 
be appropriated to the 
reserves and 
provisions corresponding to the balance 
of the profit and loss account 
as at 31st December of the year 
prior to the abrogation 
of the derogation. The sum to 
be contributed shall 
be determined by multiplying the amount of the reserves, as defined above 
and as stated 
in the approved balance sheet of 
the ECB, 
by the 
ratio between the number 
of shares subscribed 
by the central bank concerned 
and the number 
of shares already 
paid up by the other central banks. ARTICLE 50 - Initial appointment of the members 
of the Executive Board When the Executive 
Board of the ECB is being established, the President, the Vice-President 
and the other members of the 
Executive Board shall be appointed by common accord of the governments of 
the Member States 
at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government, on a recommendation from 
the Council and after consulting 
the European Parliament and 
the Council of the EMI. The President 
of the Executive 
Board shall be 
appointed for 
eight years. By way of derogation from 
Article 11.2, the Vice-President shall 
be appointed for four years 
and the other members of 
the Executive 
Board for 
terms of 
office of between 
five and eight years. 
No term 
of office shall be renewable. The 
number of members 
of the Executive Board may be smaller than 
provided for in Article 11.1, but in no circumstance shall 
it be less than four. ARTICLE 51 - Derogation from 
Article 32 51.1 If, after the start 
of the third stage, the Governing Council 
decides that 
the application of Article 
32 results in significant changes in national central 
banks' relative income positions, the amount 
of income to be allocated pursuant to Article 32 shall be 
reduced by a uniform percentage which shall not exceed 60% in the first financial 
year after the start of the 
third stage and 
which shall decrease by at least 12 percentage points in each subsequent financial year. 51.2 Article 51.1 shall be applicable for 
not more than five 
financial years after 
the start of the third stage. 
Annex I11 ARTICLE 52 - Exchange of bank notes in Conrmunity currencies Following the irrevocable fixing of exchange 
rates, the Governing Council shall take 
the necessary measures 
to ensure that 
bank notes denominated in currencies with irrevocably fixed exchange rates are 
exchanged by the national central 
banks at their respective 
par values. ARTICLE 53 - Applicability of the transitional provisions 
If and as long as there are Member States 
with a derogation Articles 43 to 48 shall be applicable. Annex IV TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNION AS SIGNED ON 7TH FEBRUARY 
1992 PROTOCOL ON THE STATUTE OF THE 
EUROPEAN MONETARY INSTITUTE 
THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES, 
DESIRING to lay down the Statute of the 
European Monetary Institute, 
HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, 
which shall be annexed to the 
Treaty establishing 
the European Community: ARTICLE 1 - Constitution and name 1.1 The European 
Monetary Institute (EMI) 
shall be established 
in accordance with Article 109f of this 
Treaty; it shall perform its functions 
and carry out its activities 
in accordance with the provisions of this 
Treaty and of 
this Statute. 
1.2 The members 
of the 
EM1 shall be the central banks of the 
Member States ("national central banks"). For the 
purposes of 
this Statute, 
the Institut monetaire luxembourgeois shall 
be regarded as the central 
bank of 
Luxembourg. 1.3 Pursuantto Article109f of this 
Treaty, both the Committee 
of Governors and the European 
Monetary Co-operation Fund 
(EMCF) shall be dissolved. All assets 
and liabilities of the 
EMCF shall pass 
automatically to the EMI. ARTICLE 2 - Objectives The EM1 shall contribute 
to the realisation 
of the conditions necessary for the transition 
to the third stage of Economic 
and Monetary Union, in 
particular by: - strengthening the co-ordination 
of monetary policies 
with a view to ensuring price stability; - making the preparations required 
for the establishment 
of the European System 
of Central Banks 
(ESCB), and for 
the conduct of a single monetary 
policy and the creation of 
a single currency in the third 
stage; - overseeing the development of the 
ECU. ARTICLE 3 - General principles 3.1 The EM1 shall carry 
out the 
tasks and 
functions conferred upon it by this Treaty 
and this Statute without 
prejudice to the responsibility 
of the competent authorities for 
the conduct 
of the monetary 
policy within the respective Member 
States. 3.2 The EM1 shall act 
in accordance with the objectives and 
principles stated in Article 2 of the 
Statute of the 
ESCB. ARTICLE 4 - Primary tasks 4.1 In accordance with Article 109f(2) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall : - strengthen co-operation 
between the 
national central banks; 
Annex IV - strengthen the co-ordination 
of the 
monetary policies of 
the Member States 
with the aim of ensuring price 
stability; - monitor the functioning of 
the ~uro~ean Monetary System 
(EMS); - hold consultations concerning 
issues falling 
within the competence of the national central 
banks and 
affecting the stability of 
financial institutions and markets; 
- take over the tasks of 
the EMCF; in particular it shall perform 
the functions 
referred to in Articles 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3; - facilitate the use 
of the ECU and oversee its development, 
including the smooth functioning of the 
ECU clearing system. The EM1 shall also: 
- hold regular 
consultations concerning the 
course of monetary 
policies and the use 
of monetary policy instruments; - normally be consulted 
by the national monetary authorities 
before they take decisions 
on the course of 
monetary policy in the context 
of the common framework for ex ante co-ordination. 
4.2 At the latest 
by 31st December 1996, 
the EM1 shall specify the regulatory, organisational 
and logistical framework necessary for 
the ESCB 
to perform its 
tasks in the third stage, in accordance with the principle 
of an open market economy with free competition. This 
framework shall 
be submitted by the Council 
of the EM1 for decision to 
the ECB at the date 
of its establishment. In accordance with Article 109f(3) of this Treaty, the 
EM1 shall in particular: - prepare the instruments 
and the procedures 
necessary for 
carrying out 
a single 
monetary policy in the third 
stage; - promote the harmonisation, where necessary, 
of the rules 
and practices governing the 
collection, compilation 
and distribution of statistics 
in the areas 
within its field of competence; - prepare the rules for 
operations to be undertaken by the national central 
banks in the framework of the 
ESCB; - promote the efficiency 
of cross-border payments; 
- supervise the technical preparation 
of ECU bank notes. ARTICLE 5 - Advisory functions 
5.1 In accordance with Article 109f(4) of this Treaty, the Council 
of the EM1 may formulate opinions or recommendations 
on the overall 
orientation of monetary 
policy and 
exchange rate policy as well as on 
related measures introduced in each Member 
State. The EM1 may submit opinions or recommendations 
to governments and to 
the Council on policies which might affect 
the internal or external monetary 
situation in the Community and, in particular, the functioning of the EMS. 5.2 The Council 
of the EM1 may also make recommendations to 
the monetary authorities 
of the 
Member States concerning the conduct of their monetary policy. 5.3 In accordance with Article 109f(6) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall be consulted by the Council regarding 
any proposed Community 
act within its field 
of competence. 
Within the limits and 
under the conditions set out by the Council acting 
by a qualified majority on a proposal 
from the Commission 
and after consulting 
the European Parliament 
and the EMI, the 
EM1 shall be consulted by the authorities 
of the Member States on any draft legislative 
Annex IV provision within its field 
of competence, in particular with regard to Article 4.2. 5.4 In accordance with Article 109f(5) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 may publish its opinions 
and its recommendations. ARTICLE 6 - Operational and technical functions 
6.1 The EM1 shall: - provide for the multilateralisation of positions 
resulting from 
interventions by the national central 
banks in Community currencies and the multilateralisation of intra-Community settlements; - administer the very short-term financing mechanism 
provided for 
by the Agreement 
of 13th March 1979 between the central 
banks of the Member 
States of the European Economic Community laying down the operating procedures 
for the European Monetary System 
(hereinafter referred 
to as "EMS Agreementn) and the short-term 
monetary support mechanism provided for in the Agreement 
between the central 
banks of the Member States 
of the European 
Economic Community of 
9th February 1970, as amended; 
- perform the functions referred 
to in Article 11 of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 1969188 of 24th June 
1988 establishing a 
single facility 
providing medium-term financial assistance for 
Member States' balances of 
payments. 6.2 The 
EM1 may receive 
monetary reserves 
from the national 
central banks and issue ECUs against such 
assets for the 
purpose of implementing 
the EMS Agreement. These ECUs may be used 
by the EM1 and the national 
central banks as a 
means of settlement and 
for transactions between them 
and the 
EMI. The EM1 shall take the necessary administrative measures for 
the implementation of this 
paragraph. 6.3 The EM1 may grant to the 
monetary authorities 
of third 
countries and to international 
monetary institutions the 
status of 
"Other Holders" of ECUs 
and fix the terms and conditions under which such ECUs may be acquired, held 
or used by Other Holders. 
6.4 The EM1 shall be entitled to hold and manage foreign 
exchange reserves as 
an agent for 
and at the request 
of national central 
banks. Profits and losses 
regarding these reserves shall 
be for the account 
of the national central 
bank depositing 
the reserves. The EM1 shall perform this 
function on 
the basis of bilateral 
contracts in accordance with rules laid 
down in a decision of the 
EMI. These rules shall ensure that transactions 
with these reserves 
shall not interfere with the monetary policy and 
exchange rate 
policy of 
the competent monetary 
authority of 
any Member State and 
shall be consistent with the objectives 
of the EM1 and the proper 
functioning of the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
of the 
EMS. ARTICLE 7 - Other tasks 
7.1 Once a year the 
EM1 shall address a 
report to the Council 
on the state 
of the 
preparations for the 
third stage. These reports 
shall include an assessment of the progress towards 
convergence in the Community, and cover 
in particular the 
adaptation of monetary policy instruments and 
the preparation 
of the procedures necessary for carrying out 
a single 
monetary policy in the third stage, as well as 
the statutory 
requirements Annex IV to be fulfilled for national 
central banks 
to become an integral part of 
the ESCB. 7.2 In accordance with the Council decisions referred 
to in Article 109f(7) of this 
Treaty, the EM1 may perform other tasks for 
the preparation of the third stage. ARTICLE 8 - Independence The members 
of the Council of 
the EM1 who are the representatives of their institutions 
shall, with respect to 
their activities, act according 
to their 
own responsibilities. In exercising the powers and performing the tasks and duties conferred 
upon them 
by this Treaty and 
this Statute, the Council of the EM1 may not seek or take any 
instructions from Community institutions or 
bodies or governments of Member States. The Community institutions and bodies 
as well 
as the governments of the 
Member States undertake to respect this principle and 
not to seek to influence the 
Council of the EM1 in the performance of its tasks. ARTICLE 9 - Administration 9.1 In accordance with Article 109f(l) of this 
Treaty, the EM1 shall be directed and 
managed by the Council of 
the EMI. 9.2 The Council 
of the EM1 shall consist of a 
President and the Governors of the national 
central banks, one 
of whom shall be Vice-President. If a Governor is 
prevented from attending 
a meeting, he may nominate another 
representative of 
his institution. 9.3 The President shall 
be appointed 
by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the level of Heads of 
State or of 
Government, on a recommendation from, 
as the case 
may be, the Committee of 
Governors or the Council 
of the EMI, and after consulting the 
European Parliament and the 
Council. The President 
shall be selected 
from among persons 
of recognised standing and professional experience 
in monetary or banking matters. Only nationals 
of Member States may be President 
of the EMI. The Council of the 
EM1 shall appoint 
the Vice-President. The President and 
Vice-President shall be appointed for a 
period of three years. 9.4 The President 
shall perform 
his duties on 
a full-time basis. He shall not engage 
in any occupation, 
whether gainful or 
not, unless exemption is 
exceptionally granted 
by the Council of the 
EMI. 9.5 The President 
shall: - prepare and chair 
the meetings of the 
Council of the 
EMI; - without prejudice to Article 22, present the views of 
the EM1 externally; - be responsible for 
the day-to-day management 
of the 
EMI. In the absence 
of the President, his duties shall 
be performed 
by the Vice-President. 
9.6 The terms and conditions of employment of 
the President, 
in particular his salary, pension 
and other social security 
benefits, shall be the subject of a 
contract with the EM1 and shall be fixed by the Council of the EM1 on a proposal from a Committee comprising three 
members appointed by the Committee of Governors 
or the Council of the EMI, as the 
case may Annex IV be, and three members 
appointed by the Council. The President 
shall not have the right to 
vote on 
matters referred to in this paragraph. 
9.7 If the President no 
longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of his duties 
or if he has been 
guilty of serious misconduct, the Court of Justice may, on application by the Council of the 
EMI, compulsorily retire him. 
9.8 The Rules 
of Procedure of the EM1 shall be adopted by the Council of the EMI. 
ARTICLE 10 - Meetings of the Council 
of the EMI and voting procedures 
10.1 The 
Council of the EM1 shall meet at least ten times 
a year. The proceedings of Council meetings 
shall be confidential. The 
Council of the EM1 may, acting unanimously, decide to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public. 10.2 Each member 
of the Council of the EM1 or his nominee shall have 
one vote. 10.3 Save as 
otherwise provided for in this Statute, the Council of the EM1 shall act by a simple majority 
of its members. 10.4 Decisions to be taken in the context of Articles 4.2, 5.4, 6.2 
and 6.3 shall require unanimity of the members of the Council of the EMI. 
The adoption of opinions and recommendations under Articles 
5.1 and 5.2, the adoption of decisions under Articles 
6.4, 16 and 23.6 and the adoption of guidelines under Article 
15.3 shall require a qualified majority of two-thirds of the members of the Council of the EMI. 
ARTICLE 11 - Inter-institutional co-operation and reporting 
requirements 11.1 The 
President of the Council and a member of the Commission may participate, without having the right 
to vote, in meetings of the Council of the EMI. 11.2 The 
President of the EM1 shall be invited to participate 
in Council meetings 
when the Council is discussing 
matters relating 
to the objectives and tasks of the EMI. 
11.3 At 
a date to be established in the Rules of Procedure, the EM1 shall prepare 
an annual report 
on its activities and on monetary and financial conditions 
in the Community. The annual report, together with 
the annual accounts 
of the EMI, shall be addressed to the 
European Parliament, the Council and the 
Commission and also to the European Council. 
The President of the EM1 may, at the request of the European Parliament or on his own initiative, 
be heard by the competent Committees 
of the European Parliament. 11.4 Reports published by the EM1 shall be made available 
to interested parties free of charge. ARTICLE 12 - Currency denomination The operations of the 
EM1 shall be expressed in ECU. ARTICLE 13 - Seat Before the end of 1992, the decision as to where the seat of the EM1 will be established shall 
be taken by common accord of the Annex IV governments of the Member States 
at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government. ARTICLE 14 - Legal capacity The EMI, which 
in accordance with Article 109f(l) of this 
Treaty shall 
have legal personality, 
shall enjoy 
in each of the Member 
States the 
most extensive legal 
capacity accorded 
to legal 
persons under their law; it may, in 
particular, acquire 
or dispose of movable or immovable property 
and may be a party to legal 
proceedings. ARTICLE 15 - Legal acts 
15.1 In the performance of 
its tasks, and under 
the conditions laid down in this Statute, the EM1 shall: - deliver opinions; 
- make recommendations; 
- adopt guidelines, 
and take 
decisions, which 
shall be addressed to the national central 
banks. 15.2 Opinions and recommendations of the 
EM1 shall have no binding force . 15.3 The Council of the 
EM1 may adopt guidelines laying 
down the methods for the implementation 
of the conditions necessary for 
the ESCB 
to perform its functions in the third stage. 
EM1 guidelines shall have 
no binding force; they shall 
be submitted for decision to 
the ECB. 
15.4 Without prejudice to Article 3.1, a decision of the EM1 shall be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed. Articles 
190 and 191 of this Treaty shall 
apply to these decisions. 
ARTICLE 16 - Financial resources 16.1 The EM1 shall be endowed with its own resources. The size 
of the resources 
of the EM1 shall be determined by the Council of the 
EM1 with a view to ensuring 
the income deemed necessary to cover 
the administrative expenditure incurred 
in the performance of the 
tasks and functions 
of the 
EM1 . 16.2 The resources 
of the EM1 determined in accordance with Article 16.1 shall be provided out 
of contributions by the national central 
banks in accordance with the key referred to in Article 29.1 of the 
Statute of the ESCB 
and be paid up at the establishment of 
the EMI. For this purpose, the statistical 
data to be used for the determination 
of the key shall be provided by the Commission, 
in accordance with the rules adopted 
by the Council, acting by a qualified majority on a proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting 
the European Parliament, the Committee of Governors and the Committee referred to in Article 109c of this Treaty. 
16.3 The Council of the 
EM1 shall determine 
the form in which contributions shall 
be paid up. 
ARTICLE 17 - Annual accounts and auditing 17.1 The financial year 
of the EM1 shall begin 
on the first day 
of January and 
end on the last day of 
December. 17.2 The Council 
of the 
EM1 shall adopt an annual budget before the beginning of each financial year. Annex IV 
17.3 The annual accounts shall 
be drawn up in accordance with the principles established 
by the Council of the EMI. 
The annual accounts shall be approved by the Council of the EM1 and shall thereafter 
be published. 17.4 The annual accounts shall 
be audited by independent external auditors approved 
by the Council 
of the EMI. The auditors shall 
have full power to examine all 
books and accounts of the 
EM1 and to 
obtain full information about its 
transactions. The provisions of 
Article 188b of this Treaty shall 
only apply 
to an examination of the operational efficiency of 
the management 
of the EM1 . 17.5 Any surplus of the 
EM1 shall be transferred in the following 
order: (a) an amount to 
be determined 
by the Council of the 
EM1 shall be transferred to 
the general reserve fund 
of the 
EMI; (b) any remaining surplus shall 
be distributed to the 
national central banks in accordance with the key referred to 
in Article 16.2. 17.6 In the event of 
a loss incurred 
by the EMI, the shortfall shall 
be offset against the general reserve 
fund of the EMI. Any remaining shortfall shall 
be made good by contributions from the national central banks, in accordance with the key as 
referred to 
in Article 16.2. ARTICLE 18 - Staff 18.1 The Council 
of the EM1 shall lay 
down the conditions of employment of the staff of the 
EMI. 18.2 The Court 
of Justice shall 
have jurisdiction in any dispute 
between the EM1 and its servants 
within the limits and 
under the conditions laid down in the conditions of employment. ARTICLE 19 - Judicial control 
and related 
matters 19.1 The acts or 
omissions of the EM1 shall be open to review 
or interpretation by the Court of Justice in the cases and under the conditions laid down in this Treaty. The 
EM1 may institute proceedings 
in the cases and under the conditions laid 
down in this Treaty. 19.2 Disputes between the EMI, on the one 
hand, and its creditors, 
debtors or any 
other person, 
on the other, shall fall within 
the jurisdiction of the competent national 
courts, save where jurisdiction has been conferred 
upon the Court of Justice. 
19.3 The EM1 shall be subject to the liability regime 
provided for in Article 215 of this Treaty. 19.4 The Court 
of Justice shall have jurisdiction to give 
judgement pursuant to any arbitration clause 
contained in a contract concluded 
by or on behalf of 
the EMI, whether that contract be governed by public or 
private law. 
19.5 A decision of the EM1 to bring an action before the Court 
of Justice shall be taken by the Council of the 
EMI. Annex IV ARTICLE 20 - Professional secrecy 20.1 Members of 
the Council 
of the EM1 and the staff of the 
EM1 shall be required, even after 
their duties have ceased, not to disclose 
information of the kind 
covered by the obligation of professional secrecy. 
20.2 Persons having access 
to data covered by Community legislation 
imposing an obligation of secrecy shall 
be subject to such legislation. 
ARTICLE 21 - Privileges and 
inununities The EM1 shall enjoy in the territories of the 
Member States such privileges 
and immunities as are necessary for the 
performance of its tasks, under 
the conditions laid down in the Protocol on the Privileges and 
Immunities of the 
European Communities annexed 
to the 
Treaty establishing a 
Single Council and 
a Single Commission of the European Communities. 
ARTICLE 22 - Signatories The EM1 shall be legally committed 
to third parties 
by the President or the Vice-President 
or by the signatures of 
two members 
of the staff of 
the EM1 who have been duly authorised 
by the President to sign on 
behalf of 
the EMI. ARTICLE 23 - Liquidation of the EMI 23.1 In accordance with 
Article 1091 of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall go into liquidation 
on the establishment of the 
ECB. All assets 
and liabilities of 
the EM1 shall then pass automatically to the ECB. The latter shall liquidate 
the EM1 according to the 
provisions of this Article. The liquidation 
shall be completed by the beginning of the third stage. 
23.2 The mechanism for 
the creation of ECUs against gold and US dollars as provided for by Article 17 of the EMS Agreement shall be unwound by the first day 
of the third 
stage in accordance with Article 20 of the said Agreement. 
23.3 All claims and liabilities 
arising from 
the very short-term financing mechanism 
and the short-term monetary 
support mechanism, under the Agreements referred to in Article 6.1, shall be settled 
by the first 
day of the third stage. 23.4 All remaining assets of the 
EM1 shall be disposed of and 
all remaining liabilities 
of the 
EM1 shall be settled. 
23.5 The proceeds of 
the liquidation described in Article 23.4 shall be distributed to the national central 
banks in accordance with the key referred to 
in Article 16.2. 23.6 The Council 
of the 
EM1 may take 
the measures necessary for 
the application of Articles 23.4 and 23.5. 23.7 Upon the establishment 
of the ECB, the President of the EM1 shall relinquish his 
office. COMMITTEE OF 
GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE 
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY 
ANNUAL REPORT (July 1990 - December 1991) ISBN 92-9166-201-1 (PRINT), 92-9166-202-X (ONLINE)MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
A. Verplaetse APRIL 1992 Nationale Bank 
van BelgiGlBanque Nationale de Belgique 
E. Hoffmeyer Danmarks Nationalbank H. Schlesinger* Deutsche Bundesbank 
E. Christodoulou** Bank of Greece M. Rubio Banco de 
Espafia J. de Larosi5re Banque de France 
M. Doyle C. Ciampi Central Bank of Ireland Banca d'Italia P. Jaans Institut Monetaire Luxembourgeois W. Duisenberg Nederlandsche Bank J. Tavares Moreira 
R. Leigh-Pemberton Banco de Portugal 
Bank of England A member of the Commission of the 
European Communities 
is invited, as a representative, to the 
meetings of the Committee of Governors. * Replaced K.O. Pbhl with effect from 1st August 1991. 
** Replaced D. Chalikias with effect from 18th February 
1992. TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Pane INTRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT ..................... 1 PART A 
MONETARY ISSVES AhlD THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
. I . ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE OF 
GOVERNORS .......... 1 . Co-ordination of monetary policies 
........... 2 . Monitoring EMS developments .............. 3 . Work related to the move to the final stage of EMU ... 4 . Issues in the 
field of Banking Supervision and payment systems ........................ 5 . Relationships with central banks outside the Community . 6 . Co-operation with 
other Community bodies ........ I1 . ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
AND MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION . . 1 . The economic background to monetary policy 
....... 2 . Monetary and exchange rate developments ........ 3 . Prospects and monetary policy issues .......... I11 . THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES 
OF THE NEW MONETARY INSTITUTIONS 
IN STAGES TWO AND THREE OF ECONOMIC 
AND MONETARY UNION 
.... 1 . The European System 
of Central Banks .......... 2 . The European Monetary Institute 
............ PART B THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS . I . THE CREATION AND THE EVOLVING ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF ......................... GOVERNORS I1 . THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF 
THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS . I . Revised mandate 
of the Committee of Governors ........ I1 . Harmonisation of broad monetary aggregates ......... I11 . The Statute of the European System 
of Central Banks 
and of the European Central 
Bank .................... IV . The Statute of the European Monetary Institute 
....... SUMMARY TABLE : CHART 1 TABLE 1 TABLE 2 TABLE 3 TABLE 4 CHART 2 TABLE 5 TABLE 6 TABLE 7 CHART 3 CHART 4 CHART 5 CHART 6 CHART 7 CHART 8 CHART 9 TABLE 8 CHART 10 Abbreviations and symbols used 
in the Tables and Charts are listed on Pane 
65 Page ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
IN THE COMMUNITY . . . 
. . . . 
. . 
. . . 
. . . . . 
. . . 4 REAL GROWTH AND INFLATION IN THE 
COMMUNITY . . . 
6 DEVELOPMENTS IN REAL GDP 
. . . . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. 18 DEVELOPMENTS IN CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION . . . . 
19 WAGE DEVELOPMENTS (Compensation 
per employee) . . 
22 GENERAL GOVERNMENT BORROWING 
REQUIREMENTS . . . 2 3 
BUDGETARY POSITIONS 
IN THE COMMUNITY . . . 
. . 
. 25 CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCES 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . 
. 26 DEVELOPMENTS IN BROAD MONETARY AGGREGATES 
. . . 
2 8 
MONETARY TARGETS AND 
OUTTURNS . . . . . . . . 
. 29 SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES IN ERM COUNTRIES 
. 31 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
IN INTEREST RATES 
. . . . 
. 3 2 LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES 
IN ERM COUNTRIES 
. . . 
35 EXCHANGE RATES OF THE ECU AGAINST 
THE US 
DOLLAR ANDJAPANESEYEN . . . . 
. . . 
. . . . . . 
. . 
. 3 6 
POSITIONS OF ERM CURRENCIES . . . 
. . . . . . . 38 FORWARD EXCHANGE RATES IN THE 
ERM . . . . . . . 
. 4 0 EXCHANGE RATES 
OF THE GREEK 
DRACHMA AND THE PORTUGUESE ESCUDO . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . 
4 2 ECU FINANCIAL MARKETS 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . 
44 ORGANISATION CHART FOR THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 62 1 Whenever tables and charts provide 
aggregate measures for 
the Community, the ERM and narrow band members, the measures 
are based on countries' participation in 1991. The aggregate measures 
are weighted averages. INTRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT This is the first 
Annual Report of the Committee of Governors on 
its activities and 
on the monetary and financial conditions 
in the Community. The Report 
has been 
prepared in accordance with the Committee's mandate as laid down in the amended Council 
Decision of 
12th March 1990. It covers developments 
during the first one and a 
half years of Stage 
One of Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU), which started on 1st July 1990. Monetary policy co-ordination - the principal 
task of the Committee of Governors The Committee 
of Governors was 
established in 1964 and has 
since then been 
the principal 
forum for co-operation between 
the central banks of 
the EEC Member States. On the entry 
into Stage One of 
EMU the role 
of the 
Committee was considerably strengthened and 
its tasks 
were extended. In particular, additional 
emphasis was placed on the promotion 
of the co-ordination of monetary policies 
with the aim of achieving price stability as 
a necessary condition for 
the proper 
functioning of the European Monetary System (EMS). Although during Stages One and 
Two responsibility for monetary policy remains with 
the national authorities, 
the emphasis on co-ordination in the Committee's mandate reflects the recognition that both 
changes in the economic environment of the Community 
and the objective of creating 
EMU have greatly 
increased the need for compatible monetary 
policies. The gradual realisation 
of a single 
market, in particular the liberalisation 
of capital movements and 
the rapid 
integration of financial markets, 
and the 
enhanced stability of exchange 
rates within the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
(ERM) of the EMS have 
strengthened the interdependence between national 
monetary policies. As a result, the effectiveness of 
monetary policy in Member States is 
becoming increasingly 
dependent upon central bank co-operation. Moreover, the 
agreement to complete EMU within a limited 
number of years has made the 
achievement of a 
high degree of economic 
and financial convergence even more 
urgent. Gearing monetary policies to 
the attainment of 
a stable 
level of prices throughout the Community 
constitutes a crucial element 
in paving the way for 
a successful 
EMU. The co-ordination 
framework Since the start of Stage One further progress 
has been made in co-ordinating monetary policies, 
reflecting the growing consensus on 
the role of monetary 
policy and improvements in the technical aspects 
of the 
co-ordination process. There is a firmly shared conviction in the Community 
that the primary objective of monetary 
policy is to attain 
price stability, as 
a precondition for 
sustainable economic 
growth and social equity. The 
attainment of 
price stability serves as the 
guiding principle for 
the orientation of monetary 
policy in all Community countries 
and the maintenance of price stability 
will be the primary 
objective of monetary policy in full EMU. In order to 
promote this 
common aim, the Committee of Governors has reinforced its efforts 
to improve the co-ordination 
of monetary policies. In particular, as 
a complement 
to the monthly monitoring 
of current conditions 
in financial and foreign exchange markets, 
the Committee 
has introduced 
an annual forward-looking assessment of Member States' monetary policy 
intentions. This 
ex ante assessment has 
the purpose 
of evaluating their mutual 
compatibility before 
final decisions 
on the course 
of monetary policy for the following year 
are taken 
by the national authorities. This exercise is 
followed by regular reviews of the 
outturn in comparison with policy targets to assess the continued appropriateness of 
the stance of national policies in the light of evolving 
developments. In order to base these examinations 
on firmer 
technical grounds, the Committee has begun 
building a 
common analytical framework which uses a system of indicators and common 
assumptions on prospective economic 
developments, and 
which also involves 
the first steps towards improving the 
consistency, to the extent necessary, 
of the 
national definitions of 
broad monetary aggregates. Although still 
in the early stages of 
development, this technical framework has already 
proved valuable. The need 
to strengthen the co-ordination process was heightened by the fact that monetary policies 
have operated in an environment where the authorities' 
commitment to maintain current 
ERM parities has become 
increasingly credible 
to financial market 
participants. This was 
a significant development, given 
events in this period 
which might have 
led to acute 
tensions: the volatility of 
the dollar, the Gulf 
War, developments in Eastern Europe 
and the divergence of 
cyclical positions within 
the Community. Several factors may have 
contributed to the stabilisation 
of exchange rate 
expectations: the political momentum towards 
EMU; the trend towards more convergent inflation rates; 
the narrowing of current-account 
imbalances; and 
a long 
period without a general realignment, reflecting 
the pursuit of 
a "hard currency option" as a means of implementing 
anti-inflationary monetary 
policies. As exchange rate expectations 
became more stable, 
there was a narrowing of 
interest rate differentials 
between Community currencies. As a result, the financial linkages 
within the Community were reinforced and 
the room for independent national 
monetary policies was further restricted. The co-ordinated setting of monetary policies 
for 1991 In the first 
ex ante assessment of the 
orientation of national monetary policies for 1991, 
the Committee of 
Governors agreed 
that the stance of national 
policies should remain geared towards a further 
reduction of inflationary pressures. 
This assessment took into account 
the less favourable growth 
prospects in many Community 
countries, the 
potential repercussions of German unification, and 
the uncertainties in the international environment 
associated with the conflict 
in the Gulf. The execution of monetary policy was broadly in line with the intentions. Most Member States 
registered a 
slowdown in monetary growth, generally meeting 
the quantified targets where 
these were set. At the same time, interest 
rate differentials narrowed markedly, 
with rates converging towards 
the German level, 
which even though increasing 
during the year, remained the lowest in the Community. While monetary policies 
were in line with the course endorsed by the Committee of Governors, results in 1991 were 
mixed (see 
Summary Table). Although for the Community as a whole the rate of inflation - measured in terms of the weighted 
consumer price 
index - declined from 5.7% in 1990 to 5.1% in 1991, with some narrowing 
in inflation differentials, 
this outcome 
is still far 
from the final goal of price stability. 
Moreover, not 
only was inflation in 1991 appreciably higher than 
the average rate 
achieved over 
the 1986 to 1988 
period, but the result 
was also disappointing 
in the light 
of less inflationary external conditions and 
weaker economic activity 
within the Community than had 
been anticipated 
at the time when monetary jUMMARY TABLE: ECONOMIC AND 
FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS IN THE COMMUNITY a) Source: BIS and 
National Data REAL GDP CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION COMPENSATION PER EMPLOYEE CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE 
C) GENERAL GOVERNMENT 
BORROWING REQUIREMENT SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE 
d) LONG-TERM INTEREST RATE 
e) a) All figures are EEC weighted averages. 
b) Estimates c) A negative 
number indicates a deficit. d) 3-month domestic money 
market rate. e) Long-term government 
or public sector bond rate. 1986-88 average 1989 percentage change 
over the previous year 1990 3.2 3.6 6.1 1991 b) 3.6 5.3 6.2 per cent of nominal GDP/GNP 2.8 5.7 7.5 0.8 4.0 1.1 5.1 7.1 0.0 2.9 per cent -0.2 4.5 8.7 9.2 -0.9 4.3 10.9 9.9 11.6 
11.2 10.9 10.3 policy intentions were formulated (see Chart 
1). In addition, the decline 
in the average rate 
of price increase for 
the Community as a whole was largely a reflection of a substantial 
fall in inflation in the United Kingdom, while 
other countries 
with high inflation 
in 1990 made only limited progress. 
Furthermore, inflation rose 
in Germany and the Netherlands, the two Member 
States with traditionally the lowest rates. 
However, some 
countries succeeded 
in maintaining relatively low rates of inflation. The growing 
confidence in the prevailing exchange rate 
parities was beneficial for business decisions and contributed 
to stable conditions 
in financial 
markets. It also allowed countries 
with sluggish economic activity and 
low or rapidly 
falling rates 
of inflation to reduce interest 
rates in the first 
half of 1991 towards German levels. However, there were 
limits on the extent 
to which interest rates 
could be 
lowered without 
creating exchange rate 
tensions. This became evident 
in the second half 
of 1991, after interest 
rate differentials 
within the Community 
had narrowed to historically 
low levels. At the 
end of 
1991, interest rates 
had to be raised in a number of countries to signal the commitment to 
maintaining exchange rate 
stability. Constraints 
on the scope 
for independent interest 
rate changes have also 
been faced 
by countries experiencing strong inflationary pressures, 
making it difficult to keep interest rates 
at levels considered 
high enough to fight inflation. The importance of appropriate fiscal 
policies and waae developments Both the 
resilience of inflation and the conflict 
sometimes experienced between 
the objective 
of exchange rate stability 
and domestic 
considerations highlight 
the importance 
of other factors which affect price performance, notably fiscal 
policies and wage developments. Budget deficits remained excessively high in a number of 
Member States 
in 1991. Indeed, the weighted average 
of general government borrowing 
requirements in the Community rose 
sharply in 1990, despite the fact that 
low deficits were 
maintained in several countries. 
Plans for 
budgetary consolidation in 1991 were seldom fully met, 
and as a result the 
average deficit 
remained well above 4% of GDP. 
As recent experience has 
shown, fiscal imbalances 
are not just a matter of national concern. Changes in demand and 
interest rates 
generated by excessively expansionary 
national fiscal policies 
may affect economic and financial conditions throughout 
the Community 
and complicate the task of monetary policy in pursuing price stability. 
Large budget deficits within the Community have contributed to 
high real interest 
rates, which have 
dampened private investment and have reduced long-run growth potential. Concerns also apply to labour market developments. Nominal 
wages have continued 
to grow rapidly in the Community 
in 1991, 
increasing on 
average by more than 
7%, in spite of generally weaker demand conditions 
and rising unemployment. In this situation the co-ordination of monetary policies is not sufficient on its own to bring about price 
stability. If more significant progress is to be achieved in fighting inflation 
and creating a 
greater degree of economic and financial 
convergence, the national authorities 
will not only have to rein back fiscal deficits where 
they are excessive, but strong efforts should 
also be made to 
contain wage 
pressures. While these considerations apply to 
all Member 
States, they are particularly important in those which play a pivotal role in shaping the economic and financial conditions 
in the Community. Lessons for 
1992 The experience 
of the first eighteen months 
of Stage One 
was a valuable element in the assessment of the appropriate course 
of monetary policy in 1992. When reviewing national policy intentions and targets for 
the current year, the Committee of Governors was in 
full agreement 
that the thrust of the overall stance 
should be 
to promote 
a further decline in 
inflation in the Community. The monetary policies envisaged 
by the national authorities were 
considered to 
be consistent with this aim and should provide a significant anti-inflationary impetus. However, this appraisal 
was contingent upon the assumption that 
the fiscal consolidation 
and the 
moderation in labour cost pressures expected 
in 1992 would indeed be realised. The fulfilment 
of these expectations is crucial since the 
effectiveness of monetary policies in delivering a stable 
price level in the Community is heavily dependent 
upon adequate support 
from fiscal and other policies 
- especially given 
the desire to safeguard exchange rate stability within the Community 
and the more limited 
room for countries 
to set interest rates 
with a view to domestic economic conditions. 
Indeed, there is an urgent need in many Community 
countries to contain 
cost pressures arising from 
excessive wage 
claims, to adjust 
the policy 
mix by reducing fiscal 
deficits and to 
implement supply-side measures in 
order to render market forces more 
effective. Determined efforts in these fields 
are not only crucial 
if further 
progress towards price stability and a 
resumption of sustainable 
economic growth 
are to 
be achieved in 1992, but also to promote the degree 
of economic convergence which is necessary to 
underpin the 
existing ERM central parities 
in the longer run and to demonstrate the resolve to meet 
the conditions 
for entry into Stage Three 
of EMU. The first part of the Report focuses on the work of the Committee of Governors. In the first Chapter 
the activities of 
the Committee are described in greater detail. The second 
Chapter reviews the 
financial and monetary developments 
in the Community 
since the beginning of Stage One 
of EMU. The third Chapter outlines the main features 
of the new monetary institutions to 
be established in accordance with the Treaty on European Union. The second part of 
the Report provides 
an overview of the structure and organisation of 
the Committee of 
Governors. PART A MOhETARY ISSUES AND THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS 
I. ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS Since the 
beginning of Stage One, the Committee of Governors has 
taken further 
steps to strengthen the co-ordination 
of monetary policies. In addition, the Committee has focused 
on: the monitoring of developments 
in the European Monetary System 
(EMS); the institutional requirements 
for the second and third stages 
of EMU; issues in the field of banking 
supervision and 
payment systems; and relationships with non-Community countries. The Committee 
was assisted by the Committee of Alternates, the sub-committees and working groups, 
and the 
Secretariat and Economic Unit (see Part B of the 
Report). 1. CO-ORDINATION OF MONETARY POLICIES 
The Committee 
of Governors has strengthened 
its efforts to promote the co-ordination 
of monetary policies, in accordance with its revised mandate of March 1990 (see Annex I). To this end, it has 
established a common 
framework for the 
monitoring of monetary policies, which includes regular examinations 
based on a set of commonly agreed 
and mutually consistent 
indicators. Particular emphasis has been 
placed on the enhancement 
of the forward-looking analysis 
of economic and monetary trends 
in the Community. 
Each autumn, before the final decisions 
by the national authorities, 
the Committee assesses 
the national monetary 
policy intentions for the following year. This "ex anten exercise involves, in particular, an appraisal of whether the intended 
intermediate objectives of national 
monetary policies are mutually compatible and consistent 
with the objective of downward convergence 
of inflation rates throughout the Community, taking into account 
the desire to preserve exchange rate stability. 
The forward-looking 
assessments are supplemented by "ex post" surveillance exercises in which developments 
in economic and monetary 
indicators are compared with earlier projections. 
The causes 
of deviations are examined as well as the need and scope for corrective measures. 
In addition, the Committee 
of Governors has continued its practice of 
studying in detail, once a year, developments in public finance and their 
implications for the conduct of monetary policies. 
The anten and "ex post" exercises make use 
of a set of commonly agreed indicators 
and, in addition, allow each central 
bank to take into account the assessment of the other Community central banks. To ensure the broad consistency of the national projections, 
the forward-looking appraisal 
is now based on a common set 
of assumptions on economic and financial 
prospects outside 
the Community. Attention is also being devoted to the development of Community-wide economic indicators, 
to an evaluation of 
the comparability of monetary statistics, and to 
improvements in the analytical framework for 
interpreting monetary aggregates and their 
domestic and foreign counterparts. In the latter respects, a first 
step towards improving 
the consistency of the definitions 
of broad money stocks has 
been made, paying due regard 
to differences in national financial 
structures and behaviour 
and to 
the need to maintain a 
stable relationship 
between national 
monetary aggregates and the final goals of monetary policy (see Annex 11). Some of the Member States have already 
decided to adopt the revised definitions. 
2. MONITORING EMS DEVELOPMENTS 
One of the main tasks of the Committee of Governors 
is to oversee the operation of 
the EMS. This activity includes 
the joint monitoring of current exchange 
rate and monetary policy 
developments, as 
well as the examination of all the other factors 
affecting the 
functioning of the EMS exchange rate 
mechanism. The monitoring follows a 
procedure which was established by the so-called BaslelNyborg agreement of 1987. Each month, exchange rate 
trends are examined and instruments 
used to counteract exchange market 
tensions are reviewed. This review takes account 
of economic developments and the agreement that the available 
instruments to reduce tension (intervention, 
exchange rate movements 
within the band and interest rate changes) 
should be used flexibly and concertedly to promote intra-ERM exchange rate stability. Following the move 
to Stage One 
of EMU, the Committee of Governors has 
supplemented the monthly 
monitoring exercise 
with an annual examination of the 
functioning of the EMS. The first 
examination of this kind took 
place in December 1991 and covered all 
aspects of EMS operations, 
as well as current and prospective policy issues. - 12 - Developments in the use of the private 
ECU have been monitored on 
an annual basis since 1984. 
These examinations include 
assessments of the monetary implications of the growing financial use 
of the ECU, the compatibility of measures taken 
by national and Community authorities and the significance of legal and administrative obstacles to the use of the private ECU. The importance 
of these examinations has increased given 
the rapid expansion of the market (see Chapter 
11, section 2.5) and the 
transformation of the 
present ECU basket 
into the single currency in Stage Three of 
EMU. 3. WORK RELATED TO THE MOVE 
TO THE FINAL STAGE OF 
EMU In June 1989, at its meeting 
in Madrid, the European Council asked the competent 
bodies of the 
Community, including the Committee of Governors, to carry out the preparatory work for the 
organisation of an Intergovernmental Conference to lay down the subsequent stages 
of EMU. In accordance with this mandate, the Committee of Governors submitted to the Intergovernmental Conference on EMU, on 27th November 1990, its proposal 
for a Statute of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) 
and of the 
European Central 
Bank (ECB). In the course of the Intergovernmental Conference, the Committee 
of Governors added provisions covering more 
technical aspects, as well as for 
the arrangements for the transition to 
the final stage of EMU. Furthermore, on 30th October 1991, the Committee of Governors submitted its proposal 
for the Statute of the European Monetary 
Institute (EMI). In addition to this 
preparatory work, the Committee of Governors followed the developments 
at the 
Intergovernmental Conference closely and provided advice in the areas of its competence. 
In accordance with the consultation procedure foreseen in Article 
102 A 
of the EC Treaty, in November 1991, the Committee expressed 
its opinion on the Dutch Presidency's proposal for a Treaty on EMU. The Committee 
of Governors has noted with satisfaction that its preparatory work was well received by the Intergovernmental Conference and that the texts agreed 
upon by the Heads of State 
or of Government in Maastricht in December 1991 reflected closely 
the proposals of the 
Committee (see Chapter 
111). 4. ISSUES IN THE FIELD OF BANKING SUPERVISION AND 
PAYMENT SYSTEMS The revised mandate 
requires the 
Committee of Governors to hold consultations on those issues affecting the 
stability of financial institutions and markets 
which fall within the competence of the central banks. In this context, the Committee 
has examined certain issues 
arising in the field of 
banking supervision and payment 
systems. In the banking supervisory 
field, the Committee 
of Governors has considered a range 
of institution-specific aspects. In particular, the closure of BCCI 
has led the Committee 
to review the implications of this case for 
international banking supervision in conjunction with the competent supervisory 
bodies. In addition, work centred on two major topics. The first concerned the supervision of conglomerates containing a 
bank. In particular, the possible lack of transparency of a 
group's structure and operations can make it 
difficult for 
supervisors to 
take a group-wide 
financial view. This is particularly important given 
the possible risks 
of contagion from problems arising in one part of a conglomerate. A need 
was identified for banking supervisors to 
have discussions with other regulators, especially with those supervising insurance and securities 
markets. The other main theme has been 
the definition of a common 
understanding on the application 
of the Second Banking 
Co-ordination Directive, which 
is due to come into force on 1st January 1993. Before 
this date, a number 
of practical problems need to be resolved. These concern 
the respective future responsibilities of supervisors both in the countries where banking institutions are 
operating and in those where their head 
office is located. 
In this context, valuable technical assistance 
has been 
provided by the "Groupe de Contact" an informal group of 
senior EEC 
banking supervisors. 
In the area of pawlent systems, a number 
of aspects have 
been studied by the Committee of Governors; part of this work is 
currently being prepared by a working group 
which has been 
established on an ad hoc basis. The first 
issue concerns the 
design and operation 
of the ECU Clearing and Settlement 
System, in particular the 
question of whether current procedures 
satisfy the minimum 
standards laid down as a result of the G-10 work on interbank netting schemes. Prior to their 
implementation, the Committee of 
Governors examined the 
intermediation facilities 
provided by the BIS and 
by some national central banks to 
ensure a smooth operation 
of the 
daily clearing. The second aspect relates to the development of payment systems in the context of the 
Single Market and against the 
background of EMU. Work currently being performed is essentially of 
an exploratory nature and 
the Committee of Governors expects to draw some preliminary 
conclusions in the next few months. In addition, the Committee of Governors 
expressed its views on 
the Commission's Discussion Paper "Making Payments in the Internal Market" 
(COM(90)447). Further discussions are now taking place in the Commission's Consultative Group 
on which the Committee of Governors 
is represented by delegates from national central banks. RELATIONSHIPS WITH CENTRAL 
BANKS OUTSIDE THE COMMUNITY 
The Committee 
of Governors 
has continued 
to promote the co-operation with respect to 
developments in exchange markets 
between Community central 
banks and 
the central banks of the 
United States, Canada, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, 
Austria and Switzerland. This co-operation 
provides an important channel of 
information and concerns the pooling of 
data on exchange market developments, intervention and other 
official foreign exchange 
transactions in the so-called "concertation 
proceduren. Moreover, the 
Committee of 
Governors has continued the arrangements with Norges Bank agreed 
in 1984, which provide for regular 
consultations on matters of common interest. In December 1990, following 
the decision taken by the Norwegian authorities to 
peg their currency to 
the ECU, the 
Community central banks agreed 
to extend the bilateral 
co-operation with Norges Bank and concluded bilateral 
swap agreements 
governed by uniform conditions. These 
swap agreements, 
which were renewed at their maturity on 31st December 1991, give Norges Bank 
access to short-term funds for 
intervention purposes 
up to 
the equivalent 
of ECU 2 billion. 
A number of countries outside 
the EMS have established unilateral 
links with the ECU since the start of 
Stage One. Norway (as from 22nd October 1990). Sweden (17th May 1991) and Finland (7th June 
1991) unilaterally pegged their currencies 
to the ECU. With the Austrian Schilling pegged to the Deutsche Mark for many 
years, the move by the three Scandinavian countries 
extended further the 
zone of stable exchange 
rate parities in Europe. 6. CO-OPERATION WITH 
OTHER COMMUNITY BODIES 
In the performance of its tasks and 
functions, the Committee of Governors has 
collaborated with other Community bodies. 
Firstly, the Chairman of the Committee of Governors has attended the Council 
meetings devoted to the multilateral surveillance of member countries' economic policies and 
expressed the 
Committee's views on the consistency 
between monetary and other economic 
policies. In addition, the Governors participated in the informal ECOFIN Council meetings. 
Secondly, the Chairman was invited in March 1991 to attend a meeting of the European Parliament Committee 
on economic and monetary matters and industrial policy. The Chairman informed 
the Committee of the Governors' work on the Statute of the ESCB and 
of the ECB 
as well as on the measures taken 
to strengthen monetary 
policy co-ordination. Thirdly, close co-operation 
with the Commission of the European Communities has continued. Commission representatives attended the meetings of the Committee of Governors and of the Committee 
of Alternates, as well as most of the meetings 
of the sub-committees 
and working groups. Fourthly, the Committee of Governors has contributed to the 
work of the Committee 
on monetary, financial and balance-of-payments statistics which was created by a Council Decision 
in February 1991. A member of the Secretariat has permanent observer status 
on this Committee, whose work 
aims at improving the consistency of statistical data. 
Finally, the Committee of Governors has closely followed 
the work of the Monetary Committee. 
Links with this Committee are 
ensured by the central bank representatives, who 
in most cases are the Alternates 
of the 
Governors. 11. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
AND MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION 
1. THE ECONOMIC BACKGROUND TO MONETARY POLICY 
After the 
strong upswing in the late 1980s, economic growth in the Community as a 
whole has slowed down sharply over 
the last 
two years. However, there have 
been marked differences 
in the experience of individual 
countries. Whereas economic conditions 
in western Germany 
remained buoyant, growth decelerated 
elsewhere in the Community (see Table 
1). Nevertheless, inflation, which had risen in most countries in the period of rapid demand 
growth, is 
proving hard 
to eradicate (see 
Table 2). During 1991, the average inflation rate 
in the Community fell, although 
in many countries 
the decline was quite modest, 
and in some traditionally low-inflation 
countries inflation 
quickened. Economic 
conditions in the rest of the 
world, as well as German unification 
and other factors internal to 
the Community, account for 
these developments. 
1.1 External environment Since the middle 
of 1990, world 
economic activity has weakened 
more sharply than first expected, 
thus reducing 
the demand for 
Community exports and dampening growth in 
the Community. As private sector confidence 
was dented by the Gulf crisis, 
the United States 
economy slipped into recession in late 1990 and early 1991. Signs of a 
subsequent turnaround have been uneven 
and fragile: indications of some 
improvement have often 
been shortly followed 
by other signals suggesting protracted 
weakness. The 
resulting uncertainty 
surrounding prospects 
for US monetary policy and 
expected interest rate differentials against 
other major currencies 
triggered sharp swings in the dollar exchange rate. In the event, slow 
monetary growth, 
as well as other signs that inflationary pressures 
were abating, led the Federal Reserve to ease monetary 
policy on a number of occasions throughout 
the period, 
reducing short-term interest rates to 
the present low level. Elsewhere, the economic cycle in Japan lagged behind 
that of the North American 
economies and has been less pronounced, while 
in EFTA markets, 
which account for 
a greater proportion 
of Community exports than the United States 
and Japan combined, 
demand conditions have been 
subdued. Eastern Europe accounts 
for only 
a small share 
of Community countries' trade at present, and hence the reform 
process and the 
problems of the 
former USSR have 
had relatively little 
direct economic impact 
on the TABLE 1: DEVELOPMENTS IN REAL GDP 
Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: 
OECD a) Estimates b) GNP TABLE 2: DEVELOPMENTS IN CONSUMER PRICE 
INFLATION Source: BIS; National Data Belgium Denmark Germany (western) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal 
United Kingdom EEC : average ERM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States Japan 12 months Dec.90 3.5 1.9 2.8 22.8 6.5 3.4 2.7 6.6 4.4 2.7 13.7 9.3 5.8 5.3 4.0 6.1 3.8 percentage change over 
the to Dec.91 2.8 2.3 4.2 17.8 5.5 3.1 3.6 
6.1 2.6 4.9 9.6 
4.5 4.8 4.5 4.3 3.1 
2.7 1986-88 average 1.3 4.1 0.5 17.7 6.3 2.8 3.0 
5.2 0.6 0.0 10.3 4.2 3.6 3.2 2.5 3.2 0.5 previous 1989 3.1 4.8 2.8 13.7 6.8 3.6 4.0 6.3 3.4 1.1 12.6 7.8 5.3 5.0 3.9 4.8 2.3 year 1990 3.5 2.6 2.7 20.4 6.7 3.4 3.4 6.5 3.7 2.5 13.4 9.5 5.7 5.3 3.9 5.4 3.1 - 1991 3.2 2.4 
3.5 18.9 5.9 3.1 3.2 
6.4 3.1 3.9 11.4 5.9 5.1 4.7 4.2 4.3 3.3 Community. However, given 
the geo-political ties between the 
regions and 
prospects of growing 
economic integration, Community 
financial markets have 
from time to time been 
affected by developments in the eastern 
bloc. The slowdown in the world 
economy has contributed to a reduction in global inflation. Non-oil commodity prices fell sharply 
in the second half of 
1990 to their lowest level for 
around three 
years and remained 
subdued through 1991. The oil 
price hike in the autumn of 
1990 was short-lived, and 
in 1991 the average dollar price 
was only a little higher 
than the level 
preceding the Gulf crisis. Furthermore, profit margins 
on traded manufactured goods have 
been squeezed, as companies have 
tried to maintain market 
shares on both domestic and export 
markets. Weak 
world trade prices have 
helped to moderate inflation 
in the Community. 1.2 German unification The unification 
of Germany 
in the second half of 1990 has had a 
profound economic impact, not 
only in Germany, but also in the rest 
of the Community. Unification has given 
rise to a large fiscal expansion to 
support incomes and 
to encourage investment 
in eastern Germany during 
the difficult adjustment period. Output in eastern Germany has plummeted, although 
tentative signs have recently emerged that a 
pick-up is 
underway. Despite the collapse in domestic production, eastern German demand rose 
sharply following unification, 
financed largely 
by government transfers. This surge in demand came 
at a time 
when the western German 
economy was already operating at a high level 
of capacity. Consequently, the 
stimulus not only boosted output in Germany but also supported activity in other Member States. The surge in demand led to a sharp 
increase in German imports 
and a 
diversion of exports 
in 1990 and the first half of 
1991 and, as 
a result, all Community countries have 
improved their bilateral 
trade position with 
Germany, in some cases by well over 1% of GDP. 
At the same 
time, the strong 
demand in Germany fuelled 
domestic inflationary pressures. 
These pressures have been countered 
by a series 
of increases in interest rates, which have 
also affected interest rate 
conditions elsewhere 
in the Community. 
1.3 Economic performance and 
nominal convernence in the Community In spite of the surge 
in output in western Germany, the 
cyclical downturn in the Community as a whole has proved sharper than foreseen in mid-1990. This reflected the marked slowdown in external markets and weaker 
domestic spending, as real 
interest rates remained 
high and private sector 
confidence recovered 
only slowly after the 
Gulf War. Following six years 
of relatively strong growth, real GDP 
in the Community increased by only 1.1% in 1991, the lowest rate 
since 1982. As activity weakened, unemployment 
in the Community began to 
rise. Developments at the 
aggregate level mask 
an increased cyclical 
divergence between the individual Member 
States. Although growth weakened 
through 1991, the level 
of economic 
activity in western Germany has 
remained high, in marked contrast 
to the recession experienced in the United Kingdom. 
In the other 
countries, growth has 
slowed sharply, although 
it remained above 2% in Spain, Luxembourg and Portugal. The only exception 
to the 
slowdown was Greece where 
economic activity recovered 
marginally. Since the 
start of Stage One, 
the average rate 
of inflation and 
the dispersion across 
countries have narrowed modestly. 
For 1991 as a whole, consumer price inflation in the Community 
on a weighted basis fell only to around 5%, well 
above the 
rates of under 
4% experienced in the period from 1986 to 1988. 
Although external influences and the slowdown in economic activity have 
generally been 
conducive to inflation reduction, 
persistently strong growth 
in wages and inadequate fiscal consolidation in 
many countries hindered more 
significant progress (see 
Tables 3 and 4). In addition, structural rigidities, including insufficient flexibility 
in labour markets, continue to hamper the disinflationary 
process. In the high-inflation countries, the 
rate of increase of prices 
was much lower in sectors open to foreign 
competition than in the more sheltered parts of the 
economy. The convergence 
of price performance in the Community has 
been partly of 
the wrong 
kind, as inflation 
rates have risen significantly 
in Germany and 
the Netherlands, the Community countries with the best historical record in terms of 
price stability. This 
deterioration reflected a marked 
pick-up in wage settlements as well 
as increases in taxes and 
other public sector prices. 
With the exception of Italy, where 
the average rate of price increase 
in 1991 was 
essentially unchanged, the other 
Community countries 
succeeded in lowering inflation in 1991, although to 
varying extents. In the five countries (Belgium, Denmark, France, 
Ireland and Luxembourg) which, 
together with Germany and the Netherlands, 
had relatively low rates of inflation in 1990, the improvement was limited to a maximum of 0.5 percentage point and 
in most cases 
was less. Denmark had 
the TABLE 3: WAGE DEVELOPMENTS 
(Compensation per Employee) a) Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: OECD Belgium Denmark Germany (western) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom EEC : average EM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States c) Japan c) a) Whole economy; increase in nominal 
terms. b) Estimates 
c) Data covers the business sector 
only, and may thus not 
be directly comparable 
with the data for the 
EEC countries. previous year 1991 b) 5.4 3.2 6.2 16.1 8.7 4.7 7.0 8.3 4.7 4.4 17.8 8.2 7.1 6.8 6.1 4.0 3.8 percentage 1986-88 average 2.9 5.7 3.2 13.9 7.7 4.6 5.4 8.2 3.7 2.2 17.6 8.2 6.1 5.8 4.9 4.3 3.2 change 1989 3.6 3.8 3.0 17.8 6.3 
4.6 6.5 8.7 6.5 0.8 16.4 9.1 6.2 5.9 4.9 2.9 3.9 over the 
1990 5.9 3.4 4.7 20.0 7.9 5.4 3.8 10.4 5.2 3.3 18.4 9.7 7.5 7.1 6.3 3.8 4.5 TABLE 4: GENERAL GOVERNMENT BORROWING REQUIREMENTS a) a) Negative numbers indicate a 
fiscal surplus. 
b) Estimates c) Up to 1989 western Germany only; 
1990 on the basis of all German borrowing requirement over 
western German GDP; 1991 on the basis of figures of all 
Germany. lowest rate of inflation 
in 1991 at 
2.4%. Elsewhere, against 
a background 
of weak economic activity, inflation fell 
dramatically in the United Kingdom following 
sterling's entry into the ERM; in Spain, the rate declined steadily, 
but only slowly; and in Greece and Portugal, average inflation in 1991 dropped by between 1 and 2 percentage points, although 
a much sharper decline 
was recorded through the year. The trend towards a 
gradual reduction in fiscal deficits 
in the late 1980s 
has been reversed in the past two 
years in some countries. Although the deficit 
remained low in several countries, the combined 
deficit at the general 
government level rose 
from around 3% of Community 
GDP in 1989 to some 4.5% in 1990, and remained 
near that level 
in 1991. The deterioration in budgetary performance can be attributed to several factors: German unification; 
the slowdown in economic growth; and, in some countries, to slippage in the control of government spending. 
Differences in the budgetary positions of Member States 
remain substantial 
(see Chart 2). While five 
countries had general government 
deficits under 3% of GDP in 1991, at the other end of 
the spectrum the 
deficit was around 10% in Italy, and around 
15% in 
Greece. The levels 
of public sector 
debt diverge markedly and 
in three Community countries 
remain above 
100% of GDP. Current-account imbalances in Germany and the 
United Kingdom have 
narrowed markedly 
over the past 
two years (see Table 5). In Germany, the fiscal expansion 
associated with unification has 
absorbed the previously 
large national 
savings surplus, with the 
current account moving from a surplus of almost 
5% of GDP in 1989 to a deficit of over 
1% in 1991. In the United Kingdom, the 
recovery of personal sector savings 
and the 
cutback in corporate investment have 
been reflected 
in a marked decline 
in the current-account deficit. In Greece the deficit fell 
from over 5% of GDP in 
1990 to 2% in 1991. Elsewhere in the Community, a sizable current-account deficit persisted 
in Spain, financed by substantial long-term 
capital inflows attracted by profitable investment opportunities. 
The Netherlands has continued to 
record a large current-account surplus. 
2. MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE 
DEVELOPMENTS In Stage One, although the responsibility for monetary 
policy remains at the national level, the liberalisation of 
capital flows 
and b) General Government 
Borrowing Requirement, 1991 (National Sources) CHART 2: BUDGETARY POSITIONS IN THE 
COMMUNITY (per cent of nominal GDPIGNP) 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 20° PUBLIC 1 40 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 a) Gross Debt 
of General Government, end of 1990 (Commission Sources) BUDGET DEFICIT 
b) DEBT a) - - BE - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - LU . 1 I -5 0 5 10 15 I I I TABLE 5: CURRENT ACCOUNT OF THE BALANCE OF 
PAYMENTS a) Source: EEC: National Data; US and Japan: OECD Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Germany c) d) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom EEC : average ERM: average ERM Narrow Band: average United States c) Japan c) a) Negative numbers indicate a deficit 
b) Estimates c) In per cent of nominal GNP d) Up to June 
1990 western Germany 
only. per 1986-88 average 2.3 -3.2 4.3 -2.9 0.3 -0.2 0.2 -0.1 2.3 
0.9 -1.7 0.8 0.8 1.5 -3.2 3.5 cent of 1989 2.3 -1.1 4.8 -4.7 -2.9 -0.5 1.5 -1.2 3.8 0.4 -4.7 0.0 0.1 1.5 -2.0 2.0 nominal GDP 1990 1.9 1.1 3.1 -5.4 -3.4 -0.7 3.4 -1.3 3.9 -0.1 -3.2 -0.2 -0.1 0.9 -1.7 1.2 1991 b) 
2.0 1.7 -1.2 -2.1 -3.0 -0.5 4.8 -1.7 3.9 -1.1 -1.2 -0.9 -0.8 -0.5 -0.1 2.1 rapid financial integration have 
strengthened the interdependence between national policies 
in the context of the ERM. Most indicators suggest that 
monetary policies have been firm since the start of Stage One and have 
thus generally favoured 
progress towards lower 
inflation in an 
environment of stable exchange rates 
between Community currencies. 
However, in many Member 
States wage and fiscal 
developments have not 
provided sufficient support 
to monetary policy. 2.1 The stance of monetary ~olicy Due to the long and variable lags in the transmission of monetary policy, the monetary 
stance must 
be appraised on the basis of 
medium-run trends. Developments in monetary aggregates and interest rates 
provide useful evidence for this assessment. 
Monetary amregates Growth rates 
of the 
key broad monetary aggregates have 
moderated in most countries over the last 
two years (see 
Table 6). A deceleration is also evident in the broad monetary aggregates which 
have been harmonised 
for the internal use 
of the Committee of 
Governors (see Annex 11). The slowdown in monetary growth, although 
partly reflecting the weakening in 
economic activity, indicates that monetary policies tended 
to exert downward pressure on inflation. In the countries 
which announce targets, monetary growth has 
generally been 
within or close to the published ranges over 
this period 
(see Table 
7). However, in Germany, monetary growth accelerated 
in late 1991, fuelled by buoyant credit 
demand, and as a 
result the target was 
exceeded. In Spain, the overshooting in 1991 partly reflected capital inflows. In an environment of stable exchange rate 
expectations and 
liberalised capital movements, 
these inflows ultimately 
stemmed from the substantial government 
borrowing requirement. 
A similar mechanism 
led to an overshooting in Italy in 1990 and Portugal 
in 1991. Furthermore, shifts in portfolio behaviour, often 
related to financial deregulation and innovation 
or to changes 
in taxation, partly accounted for deviations 
from targets in both directions, 
as experienced in Greece, Spain, France and 
Italy. The 
avoidance of distortions from financial 
shifts was one 
of the important factors behind the revisions in the national definitions 
of broad money in 
several countries. 
TABLE 6: DEVELOPMENTS IN BROAD MONETARY AGGREGATES a) Source: BIS and National 
Data Belgium Denmark Germany b ) Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom United States Japan a) National definitions of broad money stocks 
are not suffi- 
ciently similar to be aggregated at the Community 
level (see Annex 11). The following aggregates have been selected: 
Belgium: M4e; Denmark: M National; Germany: M3; Greece: M3; Spain: (new) ALP; France: (new) M3; Ireland: M3; Italy: M2; Netherlands: M3; Portugal: L-; United Kingdom: M4; United States: M2; Japan: M2tCD. b) Up to 
1990, western Germany only. 
4th quarter/4th 1986-88 average 9.8 5.9 6.7 22.4 14.2 8.4 4.8 9.1 4.8 20.3 16.5 6.2 10.2 quarter 1989 10.5 4.3 4.7 23.8 15.3 9.1 4.6 8.8 13.0 7.7 18.9 4.7 10.5 percentage 1990 6.9 8.1 5.6 15.1 
10.4 8.1 16.7 9.9 6.8 16.0 12.1 3.8 9.2 change 1991 7.3 5.7 5.2 7.2 11.3 4.1 5.2 8.3 
5.8 15.0 5.5 2.7 3.1 TABLE 7. MONETARY TARGETS AND OUTTURNS a) A. Countries setting targets for 
money supply 
growth Target 1990 1991 1992 Variable Target Outturn Target outturn Target Germany M3 4-6 5.6 3-5 b) 5.2 3.5-5.5 Greece M3 19-21 14.2 14-16 11.7 
(8.3) e) 9-12 d) Spain M 3 
- - - 7-11 d) ALP 6.5-9.5 11.3 7-11 12.1 (10.9) e) 8-11 d) France M2 3.5-5.5 -0.5 
- - - M3 - - 5-7 d) 4.1 4-6 Italy M2 6-9 9.9 5-8 8.9 5-7 d) Portugal M 3 
- - - - 12-15 d) L - - 11.5 12 15.2 12-16 United Kingdom MO 1-5 2.5 0-4 2.8 December c) - B. Countries setting targets for the domestic source 
of money supply growth r--' Target 1990 1991 1992 Variable Target Outturn Target outturn Target Denmark DMC f) - -0.9 4-7 1.3 4-7 Netherlands Bank's DMC 
f) 6 6 7-8 11.0 7-8 Source: National Data "-" target not set 
a) Targets are set for 
a calendar year (4th 
qrt./4th qrt. or Dec./Dec.) except in the 
UK (March/March). The 1990 and 1991 outturn columns report the corresponding 
growth rate of the respective 
variable. No monetary 
target is set in 
Belgium, Ireland and Luxembourg. b) Revised from 
4-6% at the mid-year target review. 
c) Annualised percentage change 
between the 
base period and 
the last month. 
d) Target refers to a revised definition of the aggregate. e) Figures in 
parentheses show the 1991 
outturn for the revised definition to be used in 1992. f) Domestic money creation 
(Denmark: growth in 
"Lending to residents in domestic currency + Stock of bonds denominated in domestic currency 
- Special deposits". Netherlands: growth in "Lending 
to domestic private 
sector + long-term lending to domestic government 
- domestic non-monetary liabilities"). Interest rates 
In the two years 
prior to Stage One, there had 
been a significant tightening of monetary 
policies in the Community 
to counter the revival 
of inflationary pressure stemming 
from rapid demand growth. 
Through 1988 and 1989, three-month nominal 
interest rates rose 
on average by around 3 percentage points, 
with particularly strong 
increases in the United Kingdom and Spain, where 
the overheating 
of the economy was most pronounced (see Chart 3). The rise 
in short-term rates 
in this period exceeded 
the increase in inflation. In the countries whose currencies participate 
in the narrow 
band of the ERM, short-term rates have remained rather high subsequently. Indeed, in Germany and the Netherlands rates 
have risen 
significantly over 
the eighteen months under 
review. In the other narrow-band members, 
rates in late 1991 had returned to their mid-1990 levels, although 
there had been 
some broadly offsetting swings 
in interest rates during the interim 
(see Chart 4). At the end of 1990, a general upward 
movement in short-term interest rates 
was triggered by concerns about unfavourable 
price movements, arising 
partly from the oil price hike in connection with the Gulf crisis, 
but also from adverse wage developments and widening 
budget deficits, especially in Germany. With oil prices 
returning quickly to 
the pre-Gulf levels 
in early 1991, most 
Community countries sought to 
lower short-term interest rates, although rates 
remained broadly unchanged 
in Germany and the Netherlands, as 
strong inflationary pressures continued. 
In the other countries 
participating in the narrow band, inflationary 
forces were receding and growth 
prospects deteriorating, and, as exchange 
market sentiment supported greater convergence 
in the level of nominal 
interest rates, official interest rates were 
reduced significantly 
towards the lower 
German levels. As a result, interest rate 
differentials vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark declined to 
historically low levels and in some cases were 
largely eliminated 
in the first half of 1991 (see Chart 3). During the second half, the 
persistence of inflationary pressures 
and strong monetary 
growth in Germany led to further increases 
in official interest rates. As foreign exchange market 
sentiment suggested 
that limits to 
the reduction of interest rate differentials 
had been reached, 
the increases in German interest rates 
were accompanied by increases in the other narrow-band 
countries; in some cases interest 
differentials temporarily widened. 
z 2 0, Q) (D W 01 awu owzl- CHART 4: RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN INTEREST RATES BELGIUM DENMARK 3 M. DOMESTIC .-..- BONDS GERMANY I 12 GREECE - 3 M. DOMESTIC BONDS FRANCE - - 3M.DOMEsTIC - .---- BONDS - - - - - - ., - - - - - - - 11111111111 11111111111 11111111111 CHART 4: (continued) IRELAND 13 NETHERLANDS 3 M. DOMESTIC -m--- BONDS P 10 10 UNITED KINGDOM ITALY 15 - 3 M DOMESTIC - --..- BONDS - - - - - - - - - Illllllllll 11111111111 11l11111111 PORTUGAL 17 17 EEC (Weighted avg.) and USA l3 l l3 - EEC. 3 M. DOMESTIC . . 
. . . 
EEC BONDS USA. 3 M. DOMESTIC . - -. . USA: BONDS 4 89 90 91 In the two 
countries - the United 
Kingdom and Spain - whose currencies participate 
in the wide band of the 
ERM and 
where interest rates had risen particularly strongly 
in 1988-89, short-term rates have 
been reduced substantially 
since the start of Stage 
One. The decline 
reflected progress in reducing inflation and, 
in the case of Spain, also 
the strength 
of the 
peseta. In the second half of 
1991, there were signs that 
limits to the narrowing of interest rate 
differentials between the pound sterling and the narrow-band currencies were 
being approached. Outside the ERM, short-term 
rates rose sharply in Portugal and 
Greece in the second half of 1990. Rates have 
remained high through 1991 to signal the 
authorities' determination 
to bring inflation closer to 
the levels elsewhere 
in the Community. 
Long-term interest 
rates in the Community 
had also risen 
in 1988-89, but 
the increases were 
less pronounced than those 
of short-term rates, resulting 
in flatter, and in some cases 
inverted, yield 
curves (see Charts 4 and 5). Between the middle of 
1990 and 
the end of 1991, long-term 
rates fell 
in the narrow-band countries. The decline, however, 
was smallest in Germany and the 
Netherlands and 
hence long-term interest rate 
differentials also narrowed, albeit to 
a lesser extent than the differentials in the money markets. As with short-term rates, long-term 
rates came 
down more sharply in Spain and the United Kingdom. 
Long-term rates have also fallen markedly 
in Portugal. Although various factors 
may influence long-term interest rates, 
their decline suggests that expectations of future inflation 
decreased. Long-term rates have fallen 
further in early 1992. 2.2 Exchange rate 
developments in the ERM The most notable feature of recent exchange 
market developments has been the stability 
of conditions 
within the ERM. This stands 
in marked contrast to the global 
environment of large, and at times erratic, movements of 
the exchange rates of 
third currencies vis-h-vis the ERM currencies (see Chart 
6). Participation in the ERM was extended in October 1990 when the pound sterling joined the 
mechanism, with a fluctuation margin 
of *6%. The ERM has functioned smoothly since 
the start 
of Stage One and the occasional periods of tension have not 
seriously threatened 
the maintenance of central parities. The overall stability 
of the system is all 
the more striking in the light of various 
factors which could have 
resulted CHART5: LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES IN ERM COUNTRIES *) ORIGINAL NARROW BAND COUNTRIES 15 ,., BELGIUM ...... DENMARK - GERMANY - ,,,, FRANCE ............ IRELAND . NETHERLANDS .L. -. . . -. . . 
. . 
. . . * . . 
- OTHER ERM 
COUNTRIES *) Government or public sector bonds 
in more extensive exchange rate tensions. 
These include 
the volatility of the US dollar; the 
considerable uncertainty associated 
with the Gulf crisis; political and economic upheaval 
in Central and Eastern Europe; 
and the divergence between 
the cyclical positions of 
Community countries. 
Possible explanations for the increase 
in stability of 
exchange rates are 
discussed in the next 
section. The behaviour of individual currencies suggests 
that nominal 
interest rate 
differentials have been a 
major factor determining exchange 
rate movements 
in the fluctuation band, with high yielding currencies often 
approaching the upper margin 
(see Chart 
7). In the wide band, 
the Spanish 
peseta remained consistently 
in the upper half of its fluctuation 
margin, sometimes reaching the upper 
intervention rate. In the narrow band, 
the Italian lira 
was often the strongest currency. 
When interest rates 
firmed in Germany during 
the second half of 1990 and again 
in 1991, the Deutsche Mark moved into 
the upper part of the narrow band, 
accompanied by the Dutch guilder and the Belgian 
franc. In contrast, in France and Denmark, where 
the authorities lowered interest rates 
when possible, their respective 
currencies tended to remain 
in the lower part of the 
narrow band. Some exchange rate strains have arisen, however, 
when market participants considered that interest rate 
differentials did not correspond to perceived exchange 
risks. On two occasions, in the summer 
of 1990 and the spring of 1991, high-yielding 
currencies (the Spanish peseta, 
joined in the first instance 
by the Italian lira) were for a time at, or close to, 
their respective upper intervention limits 
against a currency or currencies with relatively low interest rates (the French franc, 
joined in the first instance by the Deutsche Mark 
and the Dutch guilder). In late 1990, the currencies of 
some ERM countries in relatively weak cyclical positions came 
under downward 
pressure as the Deutsche 
Mark strengthened in response to 
higher German interest rates 
and the weakness 
of the US dollar. Finally, there were tensions in late 1991 related to the 
increase in German rates. Episodes of tension were 
quickly countered 
by the monetary authorities 
by intra-marginal interventions, 
interest rate changes and movements in the band. 2.3 Factors behind ERM stability A major reason for 
the smooth operation of the 
ERM over this 
period has been the 
assessment by market participants that prospects for the maintenance of exchange rate parities had improved. 
This development 
is - CHART 7: POSITIONS OF ERM CURRENCIES Weekly averages 
of percentage deviations 
from central rates a) 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 1 1 0 0 -1 -1 1989 1990 1991 a) The distance between 
two currencies represents 
the percentage difference between 
their market exchange rate and their bilateral 
central parity. 
The Spanish peseta and 
the British pound entered the 
ERM wide band in June 1989 
and October 1990, respectively. 
b) In January 1990, the Italian lira 
entered the narrow band, 
and its central rate was adjusted downwards, 
while keeping unchanged 
the lower limit of the band. 
in turn linked to the 
effective policy 
measures taken 
by the national central banks to counter periods 
of tensions. As market participants expected authorities to 
counteract exchange 
market tensions, 
the incentive to take foreign exchange 
positions in favour of a 
realignment was 
reduced. As a result, the 
stabilising properties of 
the system were reinforced. While difficult 
to assess and 
to quantify, evidence from 
two sources suggests that market 
expectations of a 
realignment diminished in the period under review. A first 
indicator, which sheds some light 
on short-run expectations, is 
the forward 
exchange rate. If the forward exchange rate is 
outside the 
maximum range allowed 
by the fluctuation band, 
this can be interpreted 
as signalling the expectations 
of a realignment over the relevant 
time horizon. 
Indeed, the above indicator using 
the twelve-month forward 
rates vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark suggests that market 
expectations of a realignment 
have been 
the lowest since the inception 
of the EMS (see Chart 
8). A second indicator of exchange 
rate expectations is provided by long-term interest rate differentials, 
which supply information on the credibility of parities 
over a longer period. Although the differential 
should be 
interpreted with caution because of 
the different 
rnaturities, fiscal treatment and 
liquidity of the bonds being compared, the progressive 
reduction in long-term interest rate differentials vis-8-vis the Deutsche Mark during Stage 
One again suggests stronger 
market confidence 
in the maintenance of central parities in the ERM (see Chart 
5). Strengthened market 
confidence may be ascribed 
to several factors, some reflecting structural 
and political developments as well as 
others of 
a conjunctural nature. Firstly, the absence of a 
general realignment since 
January 1987 demonstrates policy-makers' growing 
awareness of the 
potential drawbacks of changes 
in parities, both 
in terms of the resulting 
inflationary stimulus 
and the damage to the credibility 
of their "hard currency policyn. Moreover, the removal 
of capital controls and 
the political momentum towards EMU have further 
added to confidence 
in the authorities* commitment 
to exchange rate stability. Secondly, differences 
in inflation performance in the Community have declined, and 
the largest current-account imbalances 
in countries participating 
in the ER. have narrowed. Finally, market 
perceptions of the impact 
of German unification 
tended to reduce 
the relative strength 
of the Deutsche Mark 
in the ERM for much of this 
period, easing the pressures on other currencies associated 
7 V) 2 G , m .c IS) 0 m C 'D 9 5 C so > c 0 'D .= a, m IS) = m ti - c 2 a, - U - & S Q% m a, z a, Q 2 5 IS) UJ 6': 5 2 3 Q 2 c 2 L% .2 a, fn = E { .- - a, a, g: - with the maintenance 
of high interest 
rates in Germany. However, the Deutsche Mark regained its relative strength in the ERM in the second half of 1991, as the Deutsche Bundesbank raised official 
interest rates twice to 
reaffirm its determination 
to continue a stability-oriented 
monetary policy. Monetary authorities have also fostered stability 
by reacting quickly and 
effectively to episodes of exchange 
market tensions. Policy 
responses complied with the principles of the 
1987 Basle-Nyborg Agreement, 
which calls on the authorities to make flexible 
and co-ordinated use of interest rate changes, intervention, 
and the scope 
for movement within 
the band. The relative importance 
of the instruments employed differed from 
country to country, depending on 
the authorities' 
assessment of the source of the tensions and 
of the likely impact of the policy 
change on domestic economic conditions. 
While in some countries - such as Belgium and the 
Netherlands - the authorities relied primarily 
on changes in interest rates, in others - such as Italy 
and the United 
Kingdom - the scope 
for exchange rate movements within 
the band has been 
used more actively. The 
intensity and frequency of foreign exchange market intervention also 
differed, but 
it is noteworthy that intervention 
was in general accompanied by the use of 
other instruments. 
2.4 Exchange rate policies of 
non-ERM countries 
Portugal and Greece have 
strengthened to different degrees 
the links between 
their currencies and those participating 
in the ERM to assist 
the fight against inflation and 
to prepare the ground 
for eventual 
entry into the mechanism (see 
Chart 9). With effect from 1st October 1990, 
Portugal abandoned its long-standing crawling-peg 
policy and 
allowed the escudo to fluctuate within 
an undisclosed band against a basket of 
ERM currencies. The high interest 
rate differential 
in favour of the 
escudo attracted large capital inflows, 
complicating monetary management and 
contributing to 
an overshooting of 
the monetary 
target. This 
was counteracted by the temporary re-imposition of controls on short-term capital flows. In Greece foreign exchange 
policy is also geared 
towards inflation reduction. Drachma depreciation 
no longer fully offsets 
the inflation and 
labour cost differentials 
vis-8-vis major trading partners, 
thus adding 
to competitive pressures in the economy. 
CHART 9: EXCHANGE RATES 
OF THE 
GREEK DRACHMA 
AND PORTUGUESE ESCUDO *) (AGAINST ERM CURRENCIES) Greek drachma 
Portuguese escudo 
*) Percentage deviation from the level 
of July 1990 (increase = appreciation of GRD or 
PTE) ERM corresponds to a 
weighted average of the ERM currencies 
(using normalised ECU weights). 
2.5 Develo~ments in the Private 
ECU The official ECU, defined as a currency 
basket composed of 
specific amounts of the currencies 
of the EEC Member 
States, came into 
existence in March 1979 at the inception 
of the EMS. It is used 
within the EMS to express the central 
exchange rate 
of participating currencies, to denominate certain claims 
and liabilities, and as a reserve instrument. The 
introduction of the official ECU 
has stimulated the 
evolution of a market 
in private ECUs, created by commercial banks. This market 
is being used 
on a significant 
and growing scale by public authorities and by the private sector. To date, 
the most important usage of 
the private ECU has been 
in financial domain (see Table 8). The ECU still has to make 
a breakthrough 
in the non-financial sphere; its use as 
an invoicing currency 
and as a means 
of settlement of non-financial transactions remains 
very limited. There is a substantial bond market denominated 
in private ECUs, with outstanding bonds amounting 
to ECU 110 billion at the end of September 1991. The share 
of total 
international bond issues denominated in ECU has been rising sharply; it was 12% in the first nine months of 1991 (compared with 34% for the US dollar and 11% for the Japanese 
yen), making it the second 
most commonly-used 
currency for international 
bond issuance in that period. Furthermore, there is a sizable market 
in short-term ECU 
securities, both in the form of Treasury bills 
and commercial 
paper. The ECU banking market has also attained a significant 
scale, with nearly ECU 
180 billion of 
lending outstanding 
at end-September 1991, of which ECU 
46 billion represented loans to non-banks. 
ECU banking is continuing to expand strongly at a time when the overall market, and all 
other major currency sectors, are 
contracting. Furthermore, whereas in the past the growth 
of ECU banking business 
was dominated by a demand for ECU 
credit, since 1989 there has been a tendency for 
ECU deposits to grow faster than ECU 
lending. This tendency was partly related to the 
accumulation of ECU reserves by central banks; as a result, the banking 
system has gradually reduced its net asset position and 
has become a 
net borrower of ECUs 
as from 1991. The strong expansion of ECU markets appears 
to have 
been related to continued market perception 
of the ECU's merits as a vehicle 
to hedge against exchange 
and interest rate 
risks. In addition, the Intergovernmental Conference 
on EMU and the prospective role of 
the ECU in the Third Stage appear 
to have stimulated the 
financial use of 
the private 
TABLE 8: ECU FINANCIAL MARKETS 
a) Source: BIS International Bonds Domestic Bonds 
Treasury Bills Euro-commercial paper 
and notes Bank Assets - interbank - other Bank Liabilities - interbank - other Memorandum Item: Central Banks' holdings of private ECUs a) There is an overlap, in particular between the securities and banking markets, owing to the role of banks as both issuers and holders of ECU securities; thus 
the total size of the market is less than 
the sum 
of the individual markets given 
in this table. ECU billion outstanding 
Sep. 1991 72.3 39.2 7.9 9.7 175.7 (129.8) (45.9) 180.9 (143.1) (37.8) 34.1 Dec. 1989 45.9 24.4 10.3 2.9 128.2 (97.4) (30.8) 116.9 (92.4) (24.5) 17.0 (end of period) Dec. 1990 54.7 35.2 8.4 6.1 148.6 (114.3) (34.3) 149.8 (118.2) (31.6) 27.1 ECU. It should also be recalled that 
the authorities 
of some Community countries and 
supranational institutions continue 
to play an important role in the ECU financial markets. For example, 
around half of the 
outstanding stock of 
international ECU 
bonds have been issued 
by national governments 
and international institutions, 
predominantly in the Community, with the balance of the funds borrowed by the business sector. Some central 
banks also hold the 
private ECU as a reserve asset. 
At the 
end of 
September 1991 
central banks together held ECU 34 billion of such reserves. In many cases these 
assets were acquired from the proceeds 
of government borrowing in ECUs. On a number of occasions central 
banks have undertaken intervention 
in private ECUs 
in the foreign exchange 
market. Derivative financial products in ECUs have been 
launched by the London and Paris 
Futures exchanges, including an ECU long-bond future 
and a 
three-month interest 
rate future. PROSPECTS AND MONETARY POLICY ISSUES 
When conducting the second 
ex ante co-ordination exercise, which 
examined national monetary policy objectives 
for 1992, the Committee 
of Governors reviewed 
forecasts of economic and 
monetary developments 
in the Community. In judging the appropriate 
thrust of monetary 
policy, particular attention was paid to the large 
margin of 
uncertainty surrounding these 
projections and 
the assumptions underpinning 
them. Economic prospects 
Forecasts presently indicate that a 
modest upturn 
in world economic growth is in prospect in 1992, which will 
provide a stimulus 
to activity within the Community. 
In the United 
States, the hesitant recovery is expected to gain momentum 
as the year progresses. Nevertheless, growth 
for the year as a whole is likely 
to be much lower than experienced in the early stages of past upswings. The Japanese economy may 
continue to slow in the early part of 
the year, although recent cuts 
in interest rates 
and budgetary measures are 
expected to limit the cyclical downturn. Activity in the EFTA countries may pick up moderately. However, given 
the close trade integration with the Community, 
the recovery expected 
in EFTA markets 
hinges in turn on a prospective 
upturn in Community markets. World trade prices are likely to remain relatively soft in 1992, leading to only small 
increases in import prices in the Community. 
Against this slowly improving international 
background, and signs 
in many countries 
that domestic conditions 
are gradually beginning to turn 
around, an upturn in economic growth 
in the Community is expected in the course of 1992. Forecasts 
produced in the autumn indicated 
that aggregate economic activity 
in the Community may 
expand by about 2% for the year as a 
whole, a rate 
of growth which would not exert pressures 
on capacity and 
labour utilisation. More 
recent data, however, suggest that 
the outcome could be less favourable. A marked reduction 
in the divergence of annual growth 
rates in the Cornunity is likely in 1992. Growth 
in western Germany will be lower, following several years 
of extraordinary buoyancy, whereas 
in the eastern 
LBnder a sharp 
turnaround is expected. On the other 
hand, most Community countries may have 
passed the 
cyclical trough, although the 
speed and strength of the recovery remain uncertain. Some improvement 
in convergence in budgetary positions 
has been assumed far 1992 on the basis 
of government intentions, although the overall fiscal imbalance 
in the Community is likely to 
remain large. A radical fiscal tightening is planned in Greece and Italy to make 
up the ground lost in 1991 and to move budgetary positions closer to a sustainable medium-term basis. In the other countries 
with either high levels 
of debt or deficits, a relatively firm fiscal stance 
is expected by the national 
authorities, although the prospective reductions 
in budgetary deficits are 
fairly small in most cases. At the Community level, the planned consolidation in the high 
deficit countries 
may be largely offset by an increase in the budget deficits in some countries with both relatively low debt and 
deficits, where 
cyclical conditions 
remain relatively weak. 
As far as labour cost 
pressures are concerned, 
some slowdown in wage growth was expected in the ex ante exercise 
for monetary 
policy co-ordination. This 
was based on the assumption that the resistance 
of firms to meet high wage 
claims would 
stiffen in an 
environment of relatively weak demand and strong competition, as well as that incomes 
policies, where applied, 
would be strengthened. Moreover, should activity 
recover as expected, 
there may also 
be a cyclical improvement 
in productivity, which would contribute to a moderation 
of unit costs. 3.2 Monetary policy prospects In the ex ante co-ordination exercise, 
the Committee of Governors considered that the 
national monetary policy intentions for the current 
year were consistent with the objective 
of reducing inflation in the Community. This assessment, however, 
was contingent upon the assumption that price 
developments would not be threatened by a number of factors outside the control of the monetary authorities. 
In this respect, not 
only may the assumptions 
about the international environment prove 
too optimistic, but there are also 
risks in a number of countries that 
plans for fiscal consolidation 
will not 
be realised, adding 
to the overall fiscal 
pressure in the Community, 
and that 
cost pressures 
will not 
abate as 
expected. If these risks 
materialise, monetary policies 
will have to be reviewed, and, 
if necessary, revised taking due 
account of their primary objective of 
promoting price stability. 
The task of monetary 
policy co-ordination will continue to prove 
difficult, as long as significant divergences persist 
between national 
economic conditions. In the last 
two years, foreign exchange market 
expectations have led to pressures 
for a marked narrowing of interest rate differentials in the Community. 
As a result, the scope 
for setting interest rates with a view to national economic conditions has 
become rather 
restricted. If the benefits 
of exchange rate stability 
are to be preserved, a monetary response 
to shocks originating 
in one country 
- especially if that country plays an important role in shaping economic 
conditions throughout the Community - would be quickly transmitted to 
the other 
Community countries. In this situation, there is a risk that 
a monetary tightening to counteract unfavourable 
price developments in some Member 
States will conflict with the desire for lower 
interest rates 
in countries with a low, or rapidly falling, 
rate of inflation and weak economic activity. However, the resulting policy 
dilemmas between domestic 
objectives and the desire to 
maintain exchange rate 
stability cannot be resolved by monetary policies alone. 
The high degree 
of integration in the Community and the interdependence between the 
national economies imposes 
constraints on all areas 
of national macro-economic management. The 
primary objective of monetary 
policy is to promote price stability 
throughout the Community and it 
is against this objective that the 
success and effectiveness of monetary policy will be judged. As 
long as strong price 
pressures continue 
in a number of countries, there will be severe limits 
to the scope for easing the overall 
monetary conditions 
in the Community. 
The difficulties 
involved in co-ordinating monetary policies in the presence of divergent national conditions, as 
well as the 
costs associated with an unbalanced policy mix, make it of the utmost importance that plans for fiscal consolidation are 
realised and that excessive wage claims are 
contained. Progress in 
these fields is 
essential not only to achieve a marked reduction 
in inflation in 1992 but also to strengthen 
the foundations underpinning 
exchange rate stability 
in the Community and 
to prepare for entry into Stage 
Three of 
EMU. 111. THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES 
OF THE NEW MONETARY INSTITUTIONS IN 
STAGES TWO AND THREE OF ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION 
In December 1991 the Heads of State 
or of Government 
agreed on the text of a Treaty 
on European Union 
which lays the legal and 
institutional foundations for 
an advancement towards a Political Union 
and the establishment 
of Economic and Monetary Union. 
The Treaty 
was signed on 7th February 
1992 and is expected 
to be ratified 
by the Member States in 
the course of 
1992. The realisation 
of EMU in accordance with the new Treaty will 
have a significant impact 
on all aspects of 
economic management 
in the Community. Essential elements of economic union will be economic 
policy co-ordination and rules 
aimed at the avoidance of excessive budget deficits. However, the 
consequences of the realisation of EMU will be most profound in the field of monetary 
policy. Possibly soon after end-1996 
- if the necessary conditions for entering Stage 
Three of 
EMU are found 
to have been met - but at the latest on 1st January 1999, the responsibility for 
monetary policy in the participating 
Member States 
will be transferred 
from the national level to 
the European 
System of Central Banks 
(ESCB). In order to ensure that 
the groundwork 
for the unprecedented move to a single, centrally decided monetary 
policy is laid, 
a European Monetary Institute 
(EMI) will be set up at the start of 
Stage Two 
on 1st January 1994. 
The EMI, which will be liquidated on the establishment 
of the ECB, will not 
only strengthen further 
the co-ordination of national monetary policies 
but will also 
prepare the necessary 
regulatory, organisational 
and logistical framework for the 
ESCB to perform its 
tasks. The Statutes 
of these two institutions 
(which are reproduced 
in Annexes I11 and IV) closely reflect the proposals 
made by the Committee of Governors as its contribution to 
the preparatory work for the Treaty on European Union. 1. THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF CENTRAL BANKS Article 1091(4) of the new Treaty states 
that: "At the starting 
date of the 
third stage, the Council shall, acting 
with the unanimity 
of the Member States without 
a derogation, on a proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting 
the ECB, adopt 
the conversion rates 
at which 
their currencies shall 
be irrevocably fixed and at which 
irrevocably fixed 
rate the ECU shall be substituted for these 
currencies, and the ECU will 
become a currency 
in its own right. This measure shall by itself not modify the external value of the 
ECU. The Council 
shall, acting according to the same procedure, also 
take the other 
measures necessary for the 
rapid introduction of the 
ECU as the single currency 
of those Member 
Statesn. The irrevocable fixing 
of exchange rates rules out 
any possibility of participating 
countries continuing to pursue independent monetary policies. Monetary Union thus implies the loss of monetary policy autonomy at the 
level of the national central 
banks and the adoption of a single monetary 
policy which, in 
accordance with the Treaty, will 
be defined and implemented 
jointly in the framework of the 
ESCB. The ESCB will operate in accordance with the provisions 
of the Treaty 
and of 
its Statute (see Annex 111). 1.1 Objectives of 
the ESCB 
The transfer 
of national decision-making power 
over monetary 
policy underscores the necessity for a clear consensus on the objectives, tasks, and operational features 
of the System. Building 
on the firmly 
shared conviction that 
price stability 
is a precondition 
for sustainable economic growth, the principal task 
of the ESCB is stated unequivocally: 
"the primary objective of the ESCB shall 
be to maintain price stabilityn. This should not be misinterpreted as 
implying that 
monetary policy will be conducted single-mindedly, 
with no regard to the 
other objectives 
of economic policy, as the Statute also requires 
the ESCB 
"to support the general economic policies 
in the Communityn, providing this takes 
place "without prejudice to the objective 
of price stabilityn. 1.2 Organisational features 
of the 
ESCB The organisational 
structure has 
been designed 
to ensure 
an effective achievement 
of the primary objective. The ESCB will consist of a new central institution, the European 
Central Bank (ECB) and the 
national central banks, which will be governed by a common set 
of rules. For the 
System to operate efficiently and coherently, the Member States 
are obliged to ensure 
that national legislation, 
including the statutes 
of each national central 
bank, are 
compatible with the Treaty and the Statute 
of the ECB. The System will be governed 
by the decision-making bodies of the ECB, the Governing Council 
and the Executive Board. The Governing Council 
will be the supreme decision-making 
body on all matters 
relating to the ESCB's tasks and operations. 
It will comprise the President, 
Vice-President, the other 
four members of the Executive Board and the Governors of the national central 
banks. In turn the Executive Board will be entrusted with the day-to-day implementation 
of monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines and decisions laid 
down by the Governing Council. To the extent deemed 
possible and 
appropriate, the ECB shall have 
recourse to the national central 
banks to 
carry out these 
operations. This structure meets 
two essential 
requirements. On the one hand, it allows monetary 
policy decisions 
to be placed firmly in the hands 
of the central decision-making 
body. On the other hand, it 
offers the 
possibility of executing policy decisions through the national central 
banks . 1.3 Independence and 
democratic accountability of the 
System In order for 
the System 
to maintain 
price stability it is 
important that 
the decision-making authorities 
shall not 
be influenced 
by considerations which would 
conflict with this aim. 
In consequence the Statute states 
that the 
ECB, the national central 
banks and any member 
of their decision-making 
bodies shall act 
without receiving instructions from 
political authorities. 
The favourable experience 
with independent monetary authorities in a number of countries 
is particularly relevant for 
a plural 
Community society where 
competing interests 
may tend to give greater 
thought to short-term considerations and thus lead 
to pressures in favour of a monetary policy stance which would not always 
be compatible with price stability in the longer 
run. The Statute contains 
a number 
of provisions to give 
practical effect to the principle of independence. 
Firstly, it ensures that members 
of the decision-making 
bodies can exercise their 
functions under 
assured tenure. Secondly, the functional, operational and 
financial provisions guarantee the economic independence 
of the System. Finally, the 
principle of "one person, one 
vote" in the Governing Council also constitutes 
an element of independence, 
since it reflects the 
consensus that members act 
on behalf of the System 
rather than 
as representatives of the Member 
States. While independence is 
considered to be an essential prerequisite 
for the fulfilment 
of the 
System's tasks, it is also fully recognised 
in the Statute that there must 
be democratic legitimacy 
and accountability. The Statute, 
which as part of 
the Treaty on European Union will 
have to be ratified by the Member States, 
clearly defines the powers entrusted 
to the Governing Council and 
the Executive 
Board, and 
the scope of 
their responsibilities. In addition, the President, Vice-President and 
other members of 
the Executive Board are appointed 
by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the level of the 
Heads of State 
or Government on a recommendation from 
the Council 
(of Ministers of Finance and Economic Affairs 
- the ECOFIN Council) after 
consulting the European 
Parliament and the Governing 
Council. The central 
bank Governors continue to be appointed by the competent 
national authorities, 
but the 
term of office of a 
Governor of a 
national central bank shall 
be no less than five year S. Transparency is 
an important element of democratic 
accountability. In addition to regular 
reports on the operation 
of the System and 
the publication of weekly consolidated financial statements, 
the ECB will present annual reports to the 
European Council, 
the ECOFIN Council, the Commission and the 
European Parliament. Transparency is 
further enhanced by the provision that the President of the ECOFIN Council 
and a member of the 
Commission may participate, without having the 
right to vote, in meetings of the Governing 
Council. 1.4 Operational and 
functional aspects 
To ensure 
the efficient 
operation of monetary policy, 
the Statute 
provides the System 
with the powers to select and 
utilise the necessary instruments and techniques 
of monetary 
control. The relevant 
provisions have been drafted 
with due regard to the evolutionary 
nature of financial markets and 
will allow the System to 
respond flexibly to changing market conditions. To avoid any obligation for 
the System which would render it extremely difficult, 
if not impossible, to attain 
price stability, the Statute denies the ECB 
and the national central 
banks the possibility 
of providing overdrafts or other types of 
credit facilities to 
public entities. In the field of exchange rate policy, the ESCB 
has been 
entrusted with the task of holding 
and managing the official reserves of the Member 
States and of 
conducting foreign 
exchange operations. 
This task must be exercised consistently with the provisions of the 
Treaty. The ECOFIN 
Council may "conclude formal 
agreements on an exchange rate system for 
the ECU vis-a-vis non-Community currencies", 
or, in the absence 
of such a system, may "formulate general 
orientations for exchange rate 
policyn. A number of safeguards 
have been introduced 
to avoid possible conflicts 
between measures taken 
or views 
expressed by 
the ECOFIN Council and the operation of monetary 
policy by the ESCB. In particular, when concluding formal exchange rate "agreements" 
the Council must consult 
the ECB "in an endeavour to reach a consensus consistent 
with the objective of price stability', while "general orientations" for exchange rate 
policy "shall be without prejudice to the 
primary objective 
of the ESCB to maintain 
price stabilityn. The System has also 
been assigned the 
task of 
promoting the 
smooth operation 
of payment 
systems. In relation to the 
wider goal of preserving financial stability in the Community, the ESCB "shall contribute 
as necessary to the smooth conduct 
of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities relating to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the stability 
of the financial systemn. Furthermore, 
the ECB has 
been provided with an advisory role 
on any proposed 
Community or national 
legislation within its 
field of competence. 
1.5 Transitional aspects 
The ESCB 
will be established immediately 
after the date has 
been set for the 
start of 
Stage Three, 
or by mid-1998 at 
the latest. 
In the event that some Member 
States do not 
fulfil the conditions 
for moving 
to the final stage 
they will be granted a 
derogation; protocols relating to 
Denmark and 
the United Kingdom make 
similar provisions 
should a 
decision be taken by either of these countries 
not to enter the final stage 
of EMU. Participation in the ESCB of 
the national central 
banks of 
Member States 
with a derogation is 
governed by special provisions 
in the Statute. These 
provisions recognise 
that monetary policy in these Member States remains 
a national responsibility 
and, furthermore, that these central 
banks should not participate in the formulation and execution of the single monetary policy pursued 
by the ESCB. However, to ensure that co-operation 
with these central banks is maintained, particularly in view of the need to 
prepare for their 
eventual full integration into 
the System, a further decision-making body of the 
ECB will 
be created, the General Council. This Council will be composed of the President and 
Vice-President of the 
ECB, and the Governors 
of the national central banks of all the Member States, 
and will perform consultative 
and advisory functions. 
It will 
cease to exist when all Member 
States of the Community 
have entered the final stage of EMU. 2. THE EUROPEAN MONETARY INSTITUTE 
The EM1 will be instrumental in facilitating and organising the transition to the single 
monetary policy which will 
come into effect in one step at the start 
of Stage Three. 
In preparing the 
transfer of monetary policy competence to the 
future ESCB, two aspects have to 
be taken into consideration. On the one hand, the responsibility for monetary 
policy will remain with the national authorities 
of the 
individual Member 
States, until the start of Stage 
Three, and, 
on the other, at 
the latest at that 
moment the conditions 
and operating procedures required 
for the conduct of the single monetary 
policy will have to be firmly in place. For this reason a 
two-pronged strategy will be followed in the transitional 
phase: national monetary policies will be co-ordinated 
even more 
closely than in the past and, at 
the same time, a wide range of preparatory work will 
be undertaken in order to enable 
the future 
ESCB to perform its tasks. Obviously, the changes in monetary policy operations which will 
become applicable in Stage Three must not infringe on national monetary 
policy autonomy during the transitional phase. However, the need 
to reach a state of readiness on the eve of Stage Three also implies 
that preparations will have 
to be made for the necessary adaptations 
to instruments and procedures currently 
used at national levels 
. 2.1 The tasks 
of the EM1 The importance 
of guiding monetary 
developments towards the introduction of the single monetary 
policy is clearly recognised 
in the three basic 
tasks assigned to 
the EM1 (see Annex 
IV). Firstly, the EM1 is entrusted with strengthening the co-ordination of national monetary policies with a view to ensuring price stability. 
This primary task, together with certain advisory functions, implies 
the assumption of the 
role currently 
performed by the Committee of Governors, which will 
be dissolved on the establishment of the EMI. 
In addition, the EM1 will have to facilitate the use of the private 
ECU and oversee its development, 
including the smooth functioning 
of the ECU clearing system. 
Secondly, the EM1 is called upon to make the preparation required for the conduct 
of a single monetary 
policy in. Stage Three and for 
the establishment of the ESCB 
and the 
creation of a single currency. 
To this end, the EM1 will have to 
specify at the latest by the end of 
1996 the regulatory, organisation and 
logistical framework for the ESCB. This will 
include not only the 
preparation of the 
necessary monetary 
policy instruments and procedures, 
but also cover such areas 
as the harmonisation 
of rules and practices governing the 
collection, compilation 
and distribution of the 
relevant monetary and financial statistics, 
the promotion of 
efficient EC cross-border 
payments and the supervision 
of the 
technical preparation 
of ECU bank notes. Moreover, the 
EM1 may be given additional tasks 
relating to the 
preparation of Stage Three. Thirdly, the EM1 has some operational 
tasks which partly arise from the transfer of 
the functions of the 
present European 
Monetary Co-operation Fund, which will cease to exist at the start 
of Stage Two. Such tasks include 
in particular the 
issuance of official ECUs for the purpose of implementing 
the EMS Agreement. In addition, the EM1 is entitled to hold and manage foreign 
exchange reserves 
as an agent for, and at the request of, Community central 
banks. This latter function, however, is 
subject to rules to 
be adopted by the EM1 which shall ensure that 
the EMI's transactions with these reserves 
do not interfere 
with the monetary and exchange rate 
policies of 
the national authorities and are consistent with 
the objectives of the EM1 and the proper 
functioning of the ERM. 2.2 The structure of the 
EM1 The EM1 will be a Community 
body which will have its 
own legal personality. It will be governed by the Council 
of the 
EM1 which, in addition to the Governors 
of the national central banks, 
will include a President appointed 
by common accord of the Governments of the Member States at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government on a recommendation from the Committee of Governors from 
among persons 
of recognised 
standing and professional 
expertise in monetary or banking matters. 
The President 
will prepare and chair the meetings 
of the Council 
of the EMI, 
present the 
views of the 
EM1 externally and 
be responsible for the day-to-day management. A Vice-President, chosen 
from among the 
central bank governors, will perform these duties in the absence of the President. 
The EM1 will be an independent body. The Council of 
the EM1 may not seek or 
take any 
instructions from 
Community institutions or bodies 
or Governments of Member States. However, since the responsibility 
for monetary policy remains with the national authorities, it is also 
recognised that 
the Governors 
are the representatives 
of their 
institutions. Nevertheless, with 
respect to their 
activities on the Council 
of the EMI, they will act according 
to their 
own responsibilities. During Stage Two, each Member State, 
as appropriate, will have 
to' start the process leading to the 
independence of its central bank, 
completing it at 
the latest by the time of 
the establishment of the 
ESCB. The EM1 will have its own financial 
resources to cover its administrative expenditure. These resources 
will be paid up at the establishment of the 
EM1 in the form of contributions shared 
by the Community central 
banks in accordance with a key reflecting in equal proportions their countries' 
GDP and population. The existence of the EM1 will end with the establishment of the ECB and 
it will go 
into liquidation 
in accordance with the rules 
laid down in the EM1 Statute. 2.3 Preparatory work in the monetary field 
for the move to 
Stages Two and Three 
of EMU The Treaty 
on European Union sets a very 
ambitious agenda for 
the institutional, organisation 
and legal measures 
which at the latest 
will have to 
be specified 
by the end of 
1996, i.e. within less than five 
years. While the preparatory measures for 
the conduct of a single 
monetary policy are explicitly assigned 
to the 
EMI, the complexity of the issues 
involved and the time needed to resolve 
them makes 
it prudent not to await 
the establishment of 
the EM1 on 1st January 1994 but rather to 
commence preparatory work in some of 
the relevant areas as soon as 
possible. For this reason, the Committee 
of Governors 
has not only embarked on the work required for setting 
up the EMI, but has also begun to take the 
first preparatory steps 
for laying the 
foundation for 
the conduct of the single 
monetary policy. PART B THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCm OF THE COMTTEE OF GOVERNORS 
I. THE CREATION 
AND THE EVOLVING ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS The Committee of Governors was created in 1964 by the Council 
Decision (64/300/EEC) of 8th May 1964 
on co-operation between the 
Central Banks of the Member States of the European 
Economic Community. The initial tasks of the Committee 
were: "to hold consultations concerning the general 
principles and the 
broad lines of policy of the Central Banks, in particular as regards credit and money and foreign exchange 
markets, and to 
exchange information 
at regular intervals about the most important measures that fall 
within the competence of the Central Banks, and to examine these While these original 
tasks reflected the modest ambitions 
prevailing at 
that time 
with respect to monetary co-operation within 
the Community, the Committee's role was 
increased at 
the end of 
the 1960s as 
monetary integration 
progressed and plans 
to create an economic and monetary union were first launched. 1 In 1971, the Community Central Banks 
were invited to co-ordinate their policies in monetary and credit matters within the Committee 
of ~overnors.' The Committee also 
became a vehicle for central 
bank co-operation in the balance-of-payments and exchange rate 
fields. In 1970, the Community central 
banks set 
up the system of short-term monetary a multilateral credit 
system giving 
access to short-term funds in case of a temporary balance-of-payments deficit 
due to unforeseen difficulties or 
to conjunctural divergences. Another 
step on the road towards monetary integration 
was made in 1972 with 
the establishment of the 1 See the report to the Council and the Commission 
on the realisation by stages of economic and monetary 
union in the Community (Werner Report), dated 8th October 1970. 
2 See Council Decision 
(71/142/EEC) of 22nd March 1971 
on the strengthening of co-operation between the 
central banks of the Member 
States of the European Economic Community. 
3 See 
the Agreement of 9th February 1970 setting up a system 
of short-term monetary support among 
the central banks of the Member 
States of the European 
Economic Community. 
system for the narrowing of the margins of fluctuation between 
the currencies of the 
Member States 
(the so-called :snaken). 4 At the end of the 1970s the Committee's 
tasks were extended further when the process of economic 
and monetary integration 
was revived. In March 1979, the European Monetary System (EMS) 
was set up to supersede 
the "snaken. The operational procedures were laid down in the central bank Agreement of 13th March 
1979,~ which since then has 
served as the institutional framework for central 
bank co-operation. In 1986, when 
the EC Treaty was revised in the context of the Single European 
Act, advisory status with respect to institutional 
changes in the monetary area 
was conferred upon the Committee 
of Governors (Article 
102 A). Additional advisory tasks 
were assigned to the 
Committee in 1988 with 
reference to 
the abolition of restrictions on capital movements under Article 
67 of the Treaty. Most recently, 
the Committee's responsibilities were increased in the context of Stage One 
of EMU. The mandate of the Committee 
was revised by the Council 
in March 1990 
and is reproduced 
in Annex I. The activities of the Committee under this 
revised mandate were described in Chapter I. 4 Agreement of 10th April 1972 between the central 
banks of the 
Member States of the Community 
on the narrowing of the margins of fluctuation between Community currencies. 5 Agreement of 13th March 
1979 between 
the central banks 
of the Member 
States of the European 
Economic Community laying 
down the operating 
procedures for the European 
Monetary System. The growing role 
of the Committee of 
Governors and 
the assignment of new tasks have 
necessitated changes 
in the Committee's organisational structure from time to 
time. The present structure was set up at the 
start of Stage One of 
EMU in July 1990 (see Chart 10). The Committee 
of Governors is composed of the Governors 
of the 
central banks of 
the Member 
States of the 
Community and the Director 
General of the 
Luxembourg Monetary Institute. A 
member of the 
Commission is regularly invited to the meetings of the Committee. 
In accordance with the mandate, "the members of the Committee, who are the representatives 
of their institutions, 
shall act, with 
respect to their activities on the Committee, according to 
their own responsibilities and having due 
regard to Community objectives". 
The Committee of Governors meets 
at regular intervals, normally 
ten times a year. 
The proceedings of the meetings are confidential; 
however, the Committee may 
authorise its Chairman to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public. In the performance of 
its duties, 
the Committee 
enjoys autonomy. It adopts its own 
rules of procedure 
and, unlike other Committees created under Community 
charter, has its 
own organisational structure. The Chairman is 
elected by the Committee from among its 
members. The present Chairman is 
Dr. E. Hoffmeyer, Governor 
of Danmarks Nationalbank; he succeeded Herr K.O. Pbhl, who relinquished the chairmanship when resigning as President of 
the Deutsche Bundesbank at 
the end of July 1991. The Committee 
of Governors 
is assisted 
by the Committee 
of Alternates, three sub-committees, 
the Secretariat 
and the Economic Unit. 
In addition, for 
specialised tasks, the Committee at times establishes ad hoc working groups. The Chairmen 
of the sub-committees and 
working groups 
are appointed by the Committee of 
Governors, which also appoints its 
Secretary General and the other professional members 
of the Secretariat 
and Economic Unit. The Commission is 
in general represented 
on the various sub-committees and 
ad hoc working groups. The Committee of Alternates 
is composed of senior 
representatives of Community central 
banks who have been 
appointed by the Governors as 
their alternates in the Committee of Governors. The main task of the Committee of Alternates is to 
prepare the 
meetings of 
the Committee of CHART 10: ORGANISATION CHART FOR THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS 
OF THE EEC MEMBER STATES (APRIL 1992) 
COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS Chairman: E. Hoffmeyer (1) SECRETARIAT & ECONOMIC UNIT Secretary General : COMMITTEE OF ALTERNATES l Chairman: FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
POLICY SUB-COMMI TTEE Chainnan: F. Saccmnni (2) MONETARY POLICY SUB-COMMI TTEE Chainnan: A. Borges (3) I Chairman: I I Chairman: I BANKING SUPERVISORY 
SUB-COMMITTEE I I AD HOC WORKING GROUP 
1 ON EC PAYMENT SYSTEMS 
1 Replaced K.O. Pohl with effect from 1st Au st 1991. Replaced H. Dalgaard with effect 
fm 1st %ember 1991. 1:) Replaced R. Raymond with effect fm 1st September 1991. B. @inn T . Padoa-Sch ioppa L --------------- 1 Governors on the basis 
of work carried out 
by the sub-committees, 
the Secretariat and the 
Economic Unit. 
The Committee 
of Alternates normally 
meets on the eve of the Committee 
of Governors' meetings. 
The Commission is, as a general rule, invited to 
send a senior official 
as a representative to the meetings of the Alternates. 
The Foreinn Exchange Policy 
Sub-Committee is 
composed of central bank officials who are involvea in the formulation and implementation 
of national foreign exchange policies. The Sub-Committee 
prepares the 
Governors' discussions on all foreign 
exchange issues. 
This preparatory work includes the monthly 
monitoring of exchange rate and 
monetary developments, the production of regular reports on the functioning of 
the EMS and 
developments in the use 
of the private 
ECU, as well 
as ad hoc studies on special topics. The Sub-Committee 
also arranges for the 
regular exchange of information 
with non-Community central 
banks in the framework 
of the "concertation proceduren. This procedure provides 
for the daily 
exchange of data on exchange market developments, intervention 
and other 
official foreign exchange transactions, 
and for monthly meetings 
of the "Concertation Group", which is composed of the 
members of the Sub-Committee and of the Heads of the Foreign Departments of the central 
banks of the United States, Canada, 
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Finland, 
Austria and Switzerland. The Monetary Policy Sub-Committee is 
composed of central bank officials who are involved in the formulation and implementation 
of monetary policies 
in their national institutions. The duties of 
the Sub-Committee include the 
preparation of the regular examinations 
of monetary policy intentions and their 
implementation as well as the analysis of issues relating 
to the conduct of monetary policies 
in the various stages of EMU. In this context, for instance, 
it holds consultations 
on changes in the definition 
of monetary and credit aggregates 
in the Community and reviews regularly 
developments in the field of monetary policy instruments. 
The Sub-Committee also 
prepares the Governors' annual 
assessments of the Member States' budgetary policies 
and debt 
management. The Bankinn Supervisory Sub-Committee is composed of a senior representative of each Community 
central bank. In the cases where EEC central 
banks do not 
have legal responsibility 
for banking supervision, a senior representative of the respective banking supervisory authority 
- namely, the Belgian 
Banking and Finance Commission, the Danish 
Finanstilsynet and 
the German Bundesaufsichtsamt fur das Kreditwesen 
- also participates in the meetings. The principal task 
of the Sub-Committee 
is to hold 
regular consultations on matters of common interest 
relating to the policies 
and practices of banking 
supervision in the Member States, 
particularly where there is 
a Community-wide dimension. In order to ensure 
effective co-ordination with other supervisory bodies and to avoid unnecessary 
duplication in addressing issues of common interest, the Committee 
liaises with the Basle 
Committee on Banking Supervision, the Banking Advisory 
Committee, and the 
Financial Institutions and Company 
Law Directorate of the Commission of the European 
Communities. For the execution 
of special tasks, the Committee of Governors has, at times, created 
ad hoc working groups. At present, issues of 
direct concern for central 
banks in the field of payment systems 
are being studied 
by such a special working 
group. The Secretariat 
of the Committee of 
Governors provides all secretarial services to the 
Committee itself, the Committee of Alternates and the 
sub-committees, as well 
as to the Board 
of Governors of the European Monetary Co-operation 
Fund (EMCF). In July 1990, an Economic Unit was added to the 
existing Secretariat. The principal task of 
the Economic Unit is to provide 
analytical support 
to the 
work of the Committee 
of Governors. The Secretariat and 
the Economic Unit, which are both headed 
by the Secretary 
General of the Committee, are 
independent in their work from 
any other national 
or international 
institution or government. 
The staff is 
composed of nationals from 
the Member States 
who are in most cases 
seconded from national central 
banks or international institutions. 
The number 
of staff is currently 
nineteen. The Secretariat 
is based within the 
Bank for International 
Settlements, which also provides technical 
and logistical 
support to the Committee of Governors. The expenses incurred 
by the Committee of 
Governors are shared out among 
the central 
banks in proportion to their quotas in the short-term monetary 
support facility. 
CURRENCIES ECU BEF DKK DEM GRD ESP FRF IEP 
ITL NLG PTE GBP USD JPY Belgium Denmark Germany Greece Spain France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal United Kingdom United States of America Japan European Currency Unit 
BelgianlLuxembourg franc Danish krone Deutsche Mark 
Greek drachma 
Spanish peseta French franc Irish pound Italian lira Dutch guilder Portuguese escudo Pound sterling 
US dollar Japanese yen OTHER ABBREVIATIONS BIS Bank for International Settlements 
EEC European Economic Community 
(12 Member States) 
ERM Exchange Rate Mechanism (all EEC Member 
States participate except 
Greece and Portugal) Narrow ERM Narrow band of the ERM (all EEC Member 
States participate except Greece, Spain, 
Portugal and the 
United Kingdom) GDP Gross Domestic 
Product GNP Gross National Product 
OECD Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development 1 Figures for 
the EEC, the ERM, and the ERM narrow band are weighted averages. 2 In accordance with Community practice, countries 
are listed in the Report using 
the alphabetical order of the national languages, as shown above. ANNEXES ANNEX I : Revised mandate of the Committee of Governors ANNEX 11 : Harmonisation of broad monetary aggregates ANNEX 111 : The Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank ANNEX IV : The Statute of the European Monetary Institute Annex I COUNCIL DECISION 
of 12th March 1990 amendin~ Council Decision 
6413001EEC on co-operation between the 
central banks of the Member States 
of the European Economic 
Community THE COUNCIL 
OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing 
the European Economic Community, and in particular to Article 105(1) and to the 
first indent 
of Article 145 thereof, Having regard to the 
recommendation from 
the Commission, Having regard to the 
opinion of the 
European parliamentL, 2Having regard to the 
opinion of the Economic 
and Social Committee , Whereas the European Council, at its meeting 
in Madrid on 26th and 27th June 1989, decided that 
the first stage 
of the 
realisation of economic and monetary union should begin on 1st 
July 1990; Whereas Article 
102a of the Treaty together 
with the realisation of the first stage of the economic and monetary union call for 
an increased degree of convergence in economic performance towards 
non-inflationary growth and of economic and social cohesion 
between the Member States; Whereas greater convergence 
should be promoted with a view to achieving domestic 
price stability, which is at the same time 
a necessary condition for 
stable exchange rates, in accordance with the requirements of the European Monetary System; Whereas the realisation of the first stage of economic and monetary union will 
focus on completing the internal market 
and in particular on removing all 
obstacles to financial integration, on strengthening the process of co-ordination of monetary policies, on 
intensifying co-operation between central banks on other matters 
falling within their competence 
and whereas, in this connection, consideration should be given to extending the 
scope of the central banks' autonomy; Whereas arrangements 
for the formulation of monetary policy within the framework 
of an economic and monetary union 
should provide 
for adequate autonomy 
for the institutions and for commitment to 
price stability, which 
is essential 
to the success of that union; Whereas, in view of the 
objective of the progressive realisation of economic and monetary union, the tasks should 
be extended and the tasks 
1 Official Journal 
of the European Communities 
No. C68, 19.3.1990. 2 Official Journal 
of the European Communities 
No. C56, 7.3.1990, p.47. Annex I and role 
of the Committee 
of Governors 
of the Central Banks of the Member States of the European 
Economic Community should 
be reinforced; 3 Whereas Decision 
6413001EEC should be amended in consequence, HAS DECIDED AS 
FOLLOWS: Sole Article Decision 64/300/EEC is amended as follows: 1. Article 2 is replaced by the following: "Article 2 The Committee 
shall be composed of the 
Governors of the Central Banks of the 
Member States and 
the Director-General of the Luxembourg 
Monetary Institute. If they are unable to attend, 
they may nominate another 
representative of 
their institution. 
The Commission shall, 
as a 
general rule, 
be invited to send one 
of its members 
as a representative 
to the 
meetings of the Committee. 
The Committee may, furthermore, if it considers it necessary, 
invite qualified 
persons to attend and in particular the chairman 
of the monetary committee." 2. The following 
Article is inserted: "Article 2a The chairman 
of the Committee shall be invited to participate in 
the meetings of the 
Council of Ministers 
whenever it deals with-issues involving the tasks of the Committee of Governors." 
3. Article 3 is replaced by the following: 
"Article 3 The tasks 
of the Committee shall 
be: (1) to hold consultations concerning 
the general principles and the broad lines of monetary policy, in particular as regards 
credit, the money and foreign 
exchange markets as 
well as issues falling within the competence of the central banks and affecting 
the stability of financial 
institutions and 
markets; (2) to exchange information 
regularly about the most important measures that fall within 
the competence of 
the central banks, 
and to 
examine those measures. The 
Committee shall normally 
be consulted before the 
national authorities 
take decisions on the course of monetary 
policy, such as the setting 
of annual money supply and credit targets; 
(3) to promote the 
co-ordination of the 
monetary policies 
of the Member States 
with the aim of achieving price stability as a 
necessary condition for 
the proper functioning of 
the European 
Monetary System 
and the realisation 
of its objective 
of monetary stability; 3 Official Journal 
of the 
European Communities No. 77, 21.5.1964, p.1206/64. Annex I (4) to formulate opinions 
on the overall orientation 
of monetary and exchange rate 
policy as well as on the respective measures 
introduced in individual Member States; (5) to express opinions 
to individual governments and 
the Council of Ministers on policies which might affect the internal 
and external monetary 
situation in the Community 
and, in particular, the functioning 
of the 
European Monetary System. In carrying out its tasks, the Committee shall 
keep under review 
the monetary situation 
and pr6qyscts both inside and outside the Community. The Committee shall prepare an annual report on its activities and on the monetary 
and financial conditions 
in the Community, which 
will be transmitted to the 
European Parliament, 
the Council of Ministers, and the European Council. The President of the Committee may 
be invited to appear before the European Parliament on 
this occasion and also before the 
competent committee 
of the European Parliament 
where the circumstances 
so justify. The Committee 
may authorise its chairman 
to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public." 4. The following Article is 
inserted: "Article 3a The members 
of the Committee, who are the representatives of their institutions, shall act, with respect to their 
activities on the Committee, according to their 
own responsibilities and having due 
regard to Community objectives." 5. Article 5 is replaced by the following: "Article 5 The Committee shall 
adopt its own rules of procedure. It may set up sub-committees and provide its 
own secretariat 
and research services." 
Done at Brussels, 12th March 1990. For the Council 
The President 
A. REYNOLDS Annex I1 Over the last eighteen months, 
Community. central banks and the Economic Unit have worked 
together to improve the consistency of 
national definitions of money stocks. The project has initially 
concentrated on 
broad money aggregates, which 
are used as intermediate monetary 
targets or as a key monetary indicator in most Community countries. 
Narrow monetary aggregates may 
be examined more closely at a later 
stage; however, 
a preliminary survey 
has indicated that their definitions 
are already quite 
similar across Community countries. 
The starting point 
for the harmonisation project was to 
select the national measures 
of broad money which seemed to be closest in statistical content. Even though 
their names vary the 
definitions proved to be already reasonably 
similar in most 
cases.' In addition to assets 
included in narrow aggregates (typically those 
used as an immediate means of payment), 
broad aggregates generally incorporate other 
"liquid assets", which are close 
substitutes for a means of payment either because 
they have a short 
maturity or because 
they can be easily transformed 
into a means of payment at little cost 
or risk of loss. Certain discrepancies were identified, however, 
in the asset composition and 
in other aspects, such as 
currency denomination, of the 
national definitions. Nevertheless, 
given the differences in financial structure and behaviour across Community countries, it was 
felt that full 
harmonisation, in the sense of a mechanical 
elimination of all statistical discrepancies, would have 
been inappropriate. 
Rather, the characteristics 
of assets which are, 
or could be, included 
in national definitions 
had to be examined carefully 
on a case-by-case basis in order to assess their 
relevance in practice. Furthermore, due 
regard had 
to be paid to the need 
to preserve the economic 
properties which render monetary 
aggregates useful in the conduct of monetary policy. Among these 
properties, priority was given to the stability of the link between money and 
the final 
goals. The 
importance of controllability 
was less clear, since the process of European financial integration, 
together with the objective of 
exchange rate 
stability, is gradually weakening the scope to control monetary growth at 
the national level. The economic properties 
of the broad 
aggregates chosen as a starting point 
for the harmonisation 
exercise served as benchmarks when assessing alternative 
statistical definitions. Econometric analysis showed that for most 
countries the 
selected definitions have exhibited a fairly 
stable and predictable link 
with nominal income and interest rates over 
the 1980s. Following economic and statistical analysis of 
possible alternatives for national aggregates, 
recommendations for changes 
in definition have been 
put forward. In some cases, they are being embodied 
in official national definitions; 
in others, for 
the time 
being, they will only be implemented for the internal purposes of the 
Committee of Governors, as further analysis 
may be needed. Once 
the proposed changes have been implemented, 
the definitions of 
broad money will 
be sufficiently similar across the Community 
- in terms of asset composition, 
currency denomination and sectoral definition - to facilitate both 
the direct 1 Aggregates selected were M3 in Belgium, Germany, France, 
the Netherlands, Greece and Ireland, 
M2 in Italy, Denmark and Luxembourg, 
M4 in the United Kingdom, ALP 
in Spain, and L- in Portugal. Annex I1 comparison of developments in national money 
stocks and the aggregation of the latter into monetary 
indicators for the area as 
a whole. After harmonisation, 
the aggregates under review 
display the following characteristics: (a) Asset composition 
The aggregates include 
the following monetary 
assets: notes, coins and sight deposits, as well as 
savings deposits, deposits 
at notice and fixed-time deposits, 
except those above certain maturity thresholds in 
a few countries. This latter difference is relatively 
minor in practice since, in the countries where thresholds are not used, assets are 
mostly short-term, and, where 
thresholds are used, 
the excluded 
assets have 
obvious non-monetary features, 
such as a 
very long maturity or 
a high cost of conversion into 
a liquid 
asset. Criteria based on the notions 
of liquidity and 
substitutability with other assets were applied to assess the desirability of including such 
assets as negotiable certificates, 
repurchase agreements 
between banks and 
non-banks (irrespective 
of the asset used as 
collateral), short-term bank bonds, and non-negotiable certificates. (b) Currency 
denomination and cross-border holdings 
To comply with the current practice of 
most Community countries, 
monetary aggregates 
should include 
assets, held by domestic residents, 
independently of whether they 
are denominated in domestic or foreign currency. Data on holdings of those assets are readily available 
when they are the liabilities 
of domestically-located intermediaries. 
However, given 
the increasing importance 
of cross-border 
holdings by non-financial residents, "extended national measures"which include these holdings will 
be used as auxiliary indicators 
according to the availability 
of statistical information. (C) Sectoral definition As long as 
financial structures and behaviour differ, the sectoral definition of money 
"issuers" and "holders" across the Community should take country-specific 
features into account. As a result, no common 
definition of these sectors 
can be put forward. However, as 
a general principle, all monetary liabilities of 
the (domestically-located) financial 
institutions which operate as banks should be included. The resulting aggregate is taken as 
the principal monetary indicator and, 
at present, is 
termed "M3H"for the internal purposes of the 
Committee of Governors. A 
wider concept, called internally 
"M4Hn, is also 
monitored. In addition to the instruments included in M3H, this broader 
concept consists 
of those 
liabilities of 
the non-financial sector which are highly 
substitutable for the components of 
M3H (mainly Government 
short-term paper and corporate 
commercial paper). Annex I11 TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNION AS SIGNED ON 7TH FEBRUARY 
1992 PROTOCOL ON THE 
STATUTE OF 
THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF 
CENTRAL BANKS AND OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL 
BANK THE HIGH CONTRACTING 
PARTIES, DESIRING to lay down the Statute of the European System 
of Central Banks and of the European Central 
Bank provided 
for in Article 4a of the Treaty establishing the European Community, HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, which 
shall be annexed to the Treaty establishing the European Community: 
CHAPTER I - CONSTITUTION OF THE 
ESCB ARTICLE 1 - The European System of Central Banks 
1.1 The European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the European Central Bank (ECB) shall be established in accordance with Article 4a 
of this Treaty; they shall perform 
their tasks and carry on their activities in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty 
and of this Statute. 1.2 In accordance with Article 106(1) of this Treaty, the ESCB shall be composed of the ECB and of the central 
banks of the 
Member States ("national central banks"). The 
Institut monetaire luxembourgeois will 
be the central bank of Luxembourg. CHAPTER I1 - OBJECTIVES AND TASKS OF 
THE ESCB ARTICLE 2 - Objectives In accordance with Article 105(1) of this Treaty, the primary objective of the ESCB shall 
be to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to the objective of price stability, it shall support the general economic policies in the Community with a 
view to contributing to the achievement 
of the objectives of the Community as laid down in Article 2 of this Treaty. 
The ESCB 
shall act 
in accordance with the principle of an open market economy with free competition, favouring 
an efficient allocation of resources, and in compliance with the principles 
set out in Article 3a of this Treaty. 
ARTICLE 3 - Tasks 3.1 In accordance with Article 
105(2) of this Treaty, the basic tasks to be carried out 
through the ESCB shall be: - to define 
and implement the monetary policy 
of the Community; - to conduct foreign 
exchange operations consistent 
with the provisions of Article 109 of this Treaty; - to hold and manage the official foreign reserves 
of the Member States; - to promote the smooth operation 
of payment systems. 
Annex I11 3.2 In accordance with Article 105(3) of this Treaty, the 
third indent of Article 3.1 shall be without prejudice to the holding 
and management by the governments 
of Member States 
of foreign exchange working 
balances. 3.3 In accordance with Article 105(5) of this Treaty, the 
ESCB shall contribute 
to the smooth conduct 
of policies pursued 
by the competent authorities relating to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the 
stability of 
the financial system. ARTICLE 4 - Advisory functions 
In accordance with Article 105(4) of this Treaty: 
a) the ECB shall 
be consulted: - on any proposed Community act in its fields 
of competence; - by national authorities regarding any draft legislative 
provision in its fields 
of competence, but within the limits and under the conditions set 
out by the Council in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42; b) the ECB may submit opinions 
to the appropriate Community institutions or bodies or to national authorities on matters 
in its fields 
of competence. ARTICLE 5 - Collection of statistical information 5.1 In order to 
undertake the tasks of the 
ESCB, the ECB, assisted by the national central banks, 
shall collect the 
necessary statistical 
information either 
from the competent 
national authorities 
or directly from 
economic agents. For these 
purposes it shall co-operate with the Community institutions or bodies and 
with the competent authorities 
of the 
Member States or third 
countries and with international organisations. 
5.2 The national central banks shall 
carry out, to 
the extent possible, the tasks 
described in Article 5.1. 5.3 The ECB 
shall contribute 
to the 
harmonisation, where necessary, of the rules 
and practices governing 
the collection, compilation 
and distribution of statistics 
in the areas within its fields 
of competence. 5.4 The Council, in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
Article 42, shall define 
the natural and legal persons subject to reporting requirements, the confidentiality regime and the 
appropriate provisions for enforcement. ARTICLE 6 - International co-operation 
6.1 In the field 
of international co-operation involving the 
tasks entrusted to the ESCB, the 
ECB shall 
decide how the ESCB shall 
be represented. 6.2 The ECB and, 
subject to its approval, the national central 
banks may participate in international monetary institutions. 
6.3 Articles 6.1 and 6.2 shall be without prejudice 
to Article 109(4) of this Treaty. Annex I11 CHAPTER I11 - ORGANISATION OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 7 - Independence In accordance with Article 107 of this 
Treaty, when exercising the powers 
and carrying out 
the tasks and 
duties conferred 
upon them by this Treaty 
and this Statute, neither the ECB 
nor a national central bank, 
nor any member 
of their decision-making bodies shall seek or take 
instructions from Community institutions or 
bodies, from any government 
of a Member State 
or from any other 
body. The Community institutions and bodies and 
the governments 
of the 
Member States undertake 
to respect this principle and not to 
seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the 
ECB or of 
the national central 
banks in the performance of their tasks. 
ARTICLE 8 - General principle 
The ESCB shall 
be governed by the decision-making bodies of the ECB . ARTICLE 9 - The European Central Bank 
9.1 The ECB which, 
in accordance with Article 106(2) of this 
Treaty, shall have legal 
personality, shall enjoy 
in each of 
the Member States the most 
extensive legal capacity accorded to legal 
persons under 
its law; it may, in 
particular, acquire or 
dispose of movable and immovable 
property and may 
be a party to legal proceedings. 
9.2 The ECB shall ensure 
that the 
tasks conferred upon 
the ESCB 
under Article 
105(2), (3) and (5) of this Treaty 
are implemented either by its own activities 
pursuant to this 
Statute or 
through the national central banks pursuant 
to Articles 12.1 
and 14. 9.3 In accordance with Article 106(3) of this 
Treaty, the decision-making bodies of 
the ECB 
shall be the Governing 
Council and the 
Executive Board. ARTICLE 10 - The Governing Council 
10.1 In accordance with 
Article 109a(l) of this 
Treaty, the Governing Council shall 
comprise the members of 
the Executive Board of the ECB and the Governors of the national central banks. 10.2 Subject to 
Article 10.3, only 
members of the 
Governing Council 
present in person shall have 
the right to 
vote. By way of derogation from 
this rule, the Rules 
of Procedure referred 
to in Article 12.3 
may lay down that members of the Governing 
Council may cast their 
vote by means of teleconferencing. These rules 
shall also provide that a 
member of the Governing Council 
who is prevented from voting for a prolonged 
period may appoint an alternate as a member 
of the Governing Council. Subject to 
Articles 10.3 and 11.3, each member 
of the 
Governing Council shall have one 
vote. Save as otherwise provided 
for in this Statute, the Governing Council 
shall act by a simple majority. 
In the event 
of a 
tie, the President 
shall have the casting vote. In order for 
the Governing Council to vote, there shall 
be a quorum of two-thirds 
of the members. If the quorum is not 
met, the President may convene an extraordinary meeting at which decisions may 
be taken without 
regard to the quorum. 
Annex I11 10.3 For any 
decisions to be taken under Articles 
28, 29, 30, 32, 33 and 51, the votes 
in the Governing Council shall be weighted according to 
the national central 
banks' shares in the subscribed 
capital of the ECB. The weights 
of the votes 
of the members of 
the Executive 
Board shall be zero. A decision requiring a qualified 
majority shall 
be adopted if the votes cast in favour represent at least two-thirds of the subscribed capital of the ECB 
and represent at least half 
of the shareholders. If a Governor is unable to 
be present, he may nominate an alternate to cast his weighted vote. 10.4 The proceedings 
of the meetings 
shall be 
confidential. The Governing Council may decide 
to make the outcome of its deliberations 
public. 10.5 The Governing 
Council shall meet at least ten times a year. 
ARTICLE 11 - The Executive Board 11.1 In accordance with Article 109a(2)(a) of this 
Treaty, the Executive Board shall comprise 
the President, the Vice-President 
and four other members. The members 
shall perform their 
duties on a full-time basis. No 
member shall engage 
in any occupation, whether gainful 
or not, unless exemption is 
exceptionally granted 
by the Governing Council. 11.2 In accordance with Article 109a(2)(b) of this 
Treaty, the President, the Vice-President 
and the 
other Members of the 
Executive Board shall be appointed from 
among persons of recognised standing and 
professional experience in monetary or banking matters by common accord of the governments of the 
Member States at the level of the 
Heads of 
State or of Government, on a recommendation from the Council after 
it has consulted the European Parliament and 
the Governing 
Council. Their term 
of office shall be eight years and shall not 
be renewable. Only nationals of Member States may be members of the Executive 
Board. 11.3 The terms and conditions 
of employment of 
the members 
of the Executive Board, 
in particular their 
salaries, pensions and other social security benefits 
shall be the subject of contracts with the ECB and 
shall be fixed by the Governing Council on a proposal 
from the Committee 
comprising three members appointed 
by the Governing Council 
and three 
members appointed 
by the Council. The members of the 
Executive Board shall not have 
the right to 
vote on matters referred 
to in this paragraph. 11.4 If a member of the Executive Board 
no longer fulfils 
the conditions required for the performance of 
his duties 
or if he has been guilty of serious 
misconduct, the Court of Justice may, on 
application by the Governing Council 
or the Executive 
Board, compulsorily retire 
him. 11.5 Each member 
of the Executive 
Board present in person shall have the right to vote and shall have, for 
that purpose, one vote. 
Save as 
otherwise provided, the 
Executive Board shall act 
by a simple 
majority of the votes cast. In the event of a 
tie, the President shall have 
the casting 
vote. The voting 
arrangements shall 
be specified in the Rules of Procedure 
referred to 
in Article 12.3. 11.6 The Executive 
Board shall be 
responsible for the current 
business of the ECB. Annex I11 11.7 Any vacancy 
on the Executive Board shall be 
filled by the appointment of a 
new member in accordance with Article 11.2. ARTICLE 12 - Responsibilities of the decision-making bodies 12.1 The Governing Council 
shall adopt the 
guidelines and take 
the decisions necessary to 
ensure the performance 
of the tasks entrusted to 
the ESCB under this Treaty 
and this 
Statute. The Governing Council 
shall formulate the monetary 
policy of the Community including, as appropriate, decisions relating to intermediate monetary objectives, 
key interest rates and the supply of reserves 
in the ESCB, and shall establish the 
necessary guidelines for their implementation. The Executive 
Board shall implement 
monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines and decisions laid 
down by the Governing 
Council. In doing so 
the Executive 
Board shall give the necessary 
instructions to national 
central banks. In addition the Executive Board may have certain 
powers delegated 
to it 
where the Governing Council so 
decides. To the 
extent deemed possible 
and appropriate and without prejudice to the provisions of 
this Article, the ECB shall 
have recourse 
to the national central 
banks to carry out operations which form 
part of 
the tasks of the ESCB. 12.2 The Executive 
Board shall have responsibility for 
the preparation of meetings of 
the Governing 
Council. 12.3 The Governing 
Council shall 
adopt Rules 
of Procedure which 
determine the internal organisation 
of the ECB and its decision-making 
bodies. 12.4 The Governing 
Council shall exercise the 
advisory functions referred to in Article 4. 12.5 The Governing Council 
shall take 
the decisions 
referred to in Article 6. ARTICLE 13 - The President 
13.1 The President 
or, in his absence, the Vice-President shall chair the Governing Council and 
the Executive Board of the ECB. 13.2 Without prejudice to Article 39, the President or his nominee 
shall represent 
the ECB externally. 
ARTICLE 14 - National central 
banks 14.1 In accordance with 
Article 108 of this 
Treaty, each Member 
State shall ensure, 
at the latest at the date of the establishment 
of the ESCB, that its national legislation, 
including the statutes of 
its national 
central bank, is compatible with 
this Treaty 
and this Statute. 
14.2 The statutes of the 
national central 
banks shall, in particular, provide that 
the term of office of a 
Governor of a 
national central bank shall 
be no less than 
5 years. A Governor may be relieved from office only if he 
no longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of 
his duties or 
if he has been 
guilty of serious misconduct. 
A decision to 
this effect 
may be referred to the Court 
of Justice by the Governor 
concerned or the Governing 
Council on grounds of infringement of this 
Treaty or of any 
rule of law relating to , its application. Such proceedings shall 
be instituted within two months 
of the Annex I11 publication of the decision 
or of its notification to the plaintiff or, in the absence thereof, 
of the day on which it came to 
the knowledge 
of the latter, as 
the case may be. 14.3 The national central banks are an integral part of the ESCB and 
shall act in accordance with the guidelines 
and instructions of the ECB. The Governing Council 
shall take 
the necessary steps to ensure compliance 
with the guidelines and 
instructions of the ECB, and shall require 
that any necessary information 
be given to it. 14.4 National central 
banks may perform functions other 
than those specified in this Statute unless 
the Governing Council 
finds, by a majority of two' thirds 
of the votes cast, that these interfere 
with the objectives 
and tasks of the 
ESCB. Such functions shall be performed 
on the responsibility and liability of national central 
banks and 
shall not be regarded as being part of the 
functions of the ESCB. ARTICLE 15 - Reporting commitments 
15.1 The ECB shall draw up and publish reports 
on the activities 
of the ESCB at least quarterly. 
15.2 A consolidated financial statement of the ESCB 
shall be published each week. 15.3 In accordance with Article 109b(3) of this Treaty, the ECB shall address 
an annual report 
on the activities 
of the ESCB and on the monetary policy of both 
the previous and 
the current year 
to the European 
Parliament, the 
Council and the 
Commission, and also to 
the European Council. 15.4 The reports 
and statements referred 
to in this Article shall be made available to interested parties 
free of charge. 
ARTICLE 16 - Bank notes In accordance with Article 105a(l) of this 
Treaty, the Governing Council shall 
have the exclusive right to 
authorise the issue of bank notes within the Community. 
The ECB 
and the national 
central banks 
may issue such 
notes. The bank 
notes issued by the ECB and the 
national central 
banks shall be the only 
such notes 
to have the status of legal tender 
within the Community. The ECB shall 
respect as far as possible 
existing practices 
regarding the issue and design of bank 
notes. CHAPTER IV - MONETARY FUNCTIONS AND OPERATIONS OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 17 - Accounts with the ECB and the national central 
banks In order to conduct their 
operations, the ECB and the national 
central banks may open accounts 
for credit institutions, 
public entities 
and other market 
participants and accept assets, including book-entry 
securities, as collateral. ARTICLE 18 - Open market and 
credit operations 
18.1 In order to achieve the objectives 
of the ESCB 
and to carry out 
its tasks, 
the ECB and the 
national central 
banks may: Annex I11 - operate in the financial markets 
by buying and selling outright 
(spot and forward) 
or under repurchase 
agreement and 
by lending or borrowing 
claims and marketable 
.instruments, whether in 
Community or in non-Community currencies, as well as precious metals ; - conduct credit 
operations with credit institutions and other 
market participants, with lending being based 
on adequate collateral. 18.2 The ECB 
shall establish general principles 
for open market and credit operations 
carried out by itself or the national central 
banks, including for the announcement 
of conditions under which they stand 
ready to enter 
into such transactions. ARTICLE 19 
- Minimum reserves 19.1 Subject to Article 
2, the ECB may 
require credit institutions 
established in Member States to hold minimum reserves on accounts with the ECB and 
national central 
banks in pursuance of monetary policy objectives. Regulations concerning the 
calculation and determination of the required 
minimum reserves 
may be established 
by the Governing Council. In cases of non-compliance the ECB shall be entitled to 
levy penalty 
interest and to 
impose other sanctions 
with comparable effect. 19.2 For the application 
of this Article, the Council shall, in 
accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42, define the basis 
for minimum reserves and the maximum 
permissible ratios between 
those reserves 
and their basis, as 
well as the appropriate sanctions 
in cases of non-compliance. ARTICLE 20 - Other instruments of 
monetary control The Governing 
Council may, by a majority of 
two thirds of the votes cast, decide upon 
the use of such 
other operational methods 
of monetary control 
as it sees fit, respecting Article 
2. The Council shall, 
in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 42, define the scope 
of such methods if 
they impose obligations on third parties. ARTICLE 21 - Operations with public entities 
21.1 In accordance with Article 104 of this 
Treaty, overdrafts 
or any other 
type of 
credit facility with the ECB or 
with the national central 
banks in favour of Community institutions or bodies, 
central governments, 
regional, local or other 
public authorities, other bodies governed 
by public law or public undertakings of 
Member States shall be prohibited, as 
shall the purchase directly from 
them by the ECB or national central 
banks of debt instruments. 21.2 The 
ECB and national 
central banks may act as fiscal agents for 
the entities referred to 
in Article 21.1. 21.3 The provisions of this Article shall 
not apply to publicly-owned credit institutions which, in the context of the supply 
of reserves by central banks, 
shall be given the 
same treatment by national central banks and the ECB 
as private credit institutions. 
Annex I11 ARTICLE 22 - Clearing and payment systems The ECB and national 
central banks may provide facilities, 
and the ECB may issue regulations, 
to ensure efficient 
and sound clearing and 
payment systems within 
the Community and 
with other countries. 
ARTICLE 23 - External operations 
The ECB and national 
central banks 
may: - establish relations with central banks 
and financial 
institutions in other countries 
and, where appropriate, with international organisations; 
- acquire and sell spot and forward 
all types 
of foreign exchange assets and precious 
metals; the term "foreign exchange asset" 
shall include 
securities and 
all other assets in the currency of any 
country or units of 
account and 
in whatever form held; 
- hold and 
manage the assets referred 
to in this Article; - conduct all 
types of 
banking transactions in relations with third countries 
and international organisations, including borrowing and lending operations. 
ARTICLE 24 - Other operations 
In addition to operations arising 
from their tasks, the ECB and 
the national central 
banks may enter into operations for 
their administrative purposes or for 
their staff. CHAPTER V - PRUDENTIAL SUPERVISION 
ARTICLE 25 - Prudential supervision 
25.1 The ECB may offer advice to and 
be consulted 
by the Council, 
the Commission and 
the competent authorities of 
the Member States 
on the scope and implementation 
of Community 
legislation relating 
to the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions and to 
the stability of the financial system. 25.2 In accordance with any decision 
of the 
Council under 
Article 105(6) of this Treaty, 
the ECB may perform specific tasks 
concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and other financial 
institutions with the exception of insurance undertakings. CWTER V1 - FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
OF THE ESCB ARTICLE 26 - Financial accounts 
26.1 The financial year 
of the ECB and the national central 
banks shall begin on 
the first day of January and end on the last day 
of December. 26.2 The annual accounts 
of the ECB shall be drawn up 
by the Executive Board, 
in accordance with the principles established 
by the Governing Council. The accounts 
shall be approved by the Governing Council and 
shall thereafter 
be published. 26.3 For analytical and 
operational purposes, the Executive 
Board shall draw up a consolidated balance sheet of 
the ESCB, comprising 
those Annex I11 assets and liabilities 
of the 
national central 
banks that fall within 
the ESCB . 26.4 For the application of this 
Article, the Governing Council shall establish the necessary 
rules for standardising 
the accounting and reporting of operations undertaken 
by the national central banks. ARTICLE 27 - Auditing 27.1 The accounts 
of the ECB 
and national central 
banks shall 
be audited by independent external auditors recommended 
by the Governing Council and 
approved by the Council. 
The auditors shall 
have full power to examine 
all books and 
accounts of the 
ECB and 
national central 
banks and obtain full information about their transactions. 
27.2 The provisions 
of Article 188b of this Treaty 
shall only 
apply to an examination of the 
operational efficiency 
of the management 
of the ECB . ARTICLE 28 - Capital of the ECB 28.1 The capital 
of the ECB, which 
shall become operational upon its establishment, shall 
be ECU 5,000 million. The capital 
may be increased by such amounts as may be decided by the Governing Council acting 
by the qualified majority provided 
for in Article 10.3, within the limits and under the conditions set by the Council under the procedure laid 
down in Article 42. 28.2 The national central 
banks shall 
be the sole 
subscribers to and 
holders of the 
capital of the ECB. The subscription 
of capital shall 
be according to 
the key established in accordance with Article 29. 28.3 The Governing 
Council, acting by the qualified majority provided for in Article 10.3, shall determine 
the extent to 
which and the form in which the capital shall 
be paid up. 28.4 Subject to Article 
28.5, the shares of 
the national central banks in the subscribed capital 
of the ECB may 
not be transferred, pledged or attached. 
28.5 If the key 
referred to in Article 29 is adjusted, the 
national central banks shall transfer 
among themselves capital shares to the extent 
necessary to ensure that the distribution of capital shares corresponds to 
the adjusted key. The Governing Council shall determine 
the terms and conditions 
of such transfers. ARTICLE 29 - Key for capital subscription 
29.1 When in accordance with the 
procedure referred to in Article 1091(1) of this Treaty the ESCB and the 
ECB have been 
established, the key for 
subscription of the 
ECB's capital shall 
be established. Each 
national central bank shall be assigned a weighting 
in this key which 
shall be equal to 
the sum of: - 50% of 
the share of its respective Member State 
in the population of the 
Community in the penultimate year 
preceding the establishment 
of the ESCB; - 50% of 
the share 
of its 
respective Member State 
in the gross 
domestic product at market prices of 
the Community as recorded Annex I11 in the last five 
years preceding 
the penultimate 
year before the establishment of 
the ESCB; The percentages shall be rounded 
up to the nearest multiple 
of 0.05% points. 29.2 The statistical 
data to be used for the application of this 
Article shall be 
provided by the Commission 
in accordance with the rules 
adopted by the Council under 
the procedure provided 
for in Article 42. 29.3 The weightings 
assigned to the 
national central 
banks shall 
be adjusted every five years after the 
establishment of the ESCB 
by analogy with the provisions laid down in Article 29.1. The adjusted key shall apply 
with effect from the first day 
of the following year. 
29.4 The Governing Council 
shall take 
all other measures necessary 
for the application 
of this Article. 
ARTICLE 30 - Transfer of foreign reserve assets 
to the ECB 
30.1 Without prejudice to Article 28, the ECB shall 
be provided 
by the national central 
banks with foreign reserve assets, other than Member 
States' currencies, ECUs, IMF reserve positions and SDRs, up to an amount equivalent to ECU 50,000 million. The Governing Council shall decide upon 
the proportion to be called 
up by the ECB following its establishment 
and the amounts called up at later dates. The ECB 
shall have the full right to hold 
and manage the foreign reserves that are 
transferred to it and to use them for 
the purposes set out 
in this Statute. 30.2 The contributions of each national central 
bank shall be fixed in proportion to its 
share in the subscribed capital of the 
ECB. 30.3 Each national central 
bank shall be credited by the ECB with a claim equivalent to 
its contribution. 
The Governing 
Council shall determine 
the denomination 
and remuneration of such claims. 30.4 Further calls 
of foreign reserve assets beyond the 
limit set in Article 30.1 may be effected by the ECB, in accordance with Article 30.2, within the limits and 
under the conditions set 
by the Council in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 42. 30.5 The ECB may 
hold and manage IMF reserve positions and SDRs and provide for the pooling 
of such assets. 30.6 The Governing Council shall 
take all other measures necessary 
for the application 
of this Article. 
ARTICLE 31 - Foreign reserve assets held by national central banks 
31.1 The national 
central banks shall be allowed to perform 
transactions in fulfilment of their 
obligations towards international 
organisations in accordance with Article 23. 31.2 All other operations in foreign reserve assets remaining 
with the national central 
banks after the transfers referred 
to in Article 30, and Member 
States' transactions with their foreign exchange working 
balances shall, above 
a certain limit to 
be established 
within the framework of Article 31.3, 
be subject 
to approval by the ECB 
in order to Annex I11 ensure consistency 
with the exchange rate and monetary 
policies of the Community. 31.3 The Governing 
Council shall 
issue gu'idelines with a view to facilitating such 
operations. ARTICLE 32 - Allocation of monetary income of national central banks 
32.1 The income 
accruing to the national central 
banks in the performance of the 
ESCB's monetary policy function (hereinafter referred 
to as "monetary 
income") shall be allocated at the end of 
each financial 
year in accordance with the provisions 
of this 
Article. 32.2 Subject to Article 32.3, 
the amount of 
each national 
central bank's monetary income 
shall be equal 
to its annual income derived from 
its assets held against notes 
in circulation and deposit liabilities to credit institutions. These assets shall 
be earmarked by national central 
banks in accordance with guidelines to 
be established by the Governing Council. 32.3 If, after the start 
of the third stage, the balance sheet 
structures of the national central 
banks do not, in the judgement of the 
Governing Council, 
permit the application of Article 
32.2, the Governing Council, acting 
by a qualified 
majority, may decide that, by way 
of derogation from Article 32.2, monetary income shall be 
measured according to an alternative method for 
a period of not more than five 
years. 32.4 The amount 
of each national central bank's monetary income shall be reduced 
by an amount equivalent to any interest paid by that central bank on its deposit 
liabilities to credit institutions in accordance with Article 19. The Governing Council 
may decide that national central 
banks shall be indemnified against costs 
incurred in connection with the issue of bank notes or 
in exceptional circumstances 
for specific losses arising from 
monetary policy operations undertaken for the ESCB. Indemnification shall be in a form deemed appropriate in the judgement of the Governing Council; 
these amounts may be offset against 
the national central 
banks' monetary income. 32.5 The sum 
of the national central banks' monetary income shall be allocated to the national 
central banks in proportion to their paid-up 
shares in the capital 
of the ECB, 
subject to any decision taken 
by the Governing Council 
pursuant to Article 33.2. 32.6 The clearing 
and settlement of the balances 
arising from the allocation of monetary income 
shall be carried out 
by the ECB in accordance with guidelines established by the Governing 
Council. 32.7 The Governing 
Council shall take 
all other measures necessary 
for the application of this 
Article. ARTICLE 33 - Allocation of net 
profits and losses of the 
ECB 33.1 The net profit of the ECB shall 
be transferred in the following 
order : (a) an amount to 
be determined 
by the Governing Council, which 
may not exceed 20% of the net profit, shall 
be transferred to the general reserve 
fund subject 
to a limit equal to 100% of the capital ; (b) the remaining net 
profit shall be distributed to the shareholders of the ECB in proportion to their paid-up shares. Annex I11 33.2 In the event of a loss incurred 
by the ECB, the shortfall may 
be offset against the general 
reserve fund 
of the ECB and, if necessary, following a decision by the Governing Council, against the monetary 
income of the relevant financial year 
in proportion and up to the amounts 
allocated to the national central 
banks in accordance with Article 32.5. CHAPTER V11 - GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 34 - Legal acts 
34.1 In accordance with Article 108a of this Treaty, the ECB shall: - make regulations 
to the extent necessary to implement the tasks defined in Article 3.1, 
first indent, Articles 19.1, 
22 or 25.2 and in cases which shall be laid down in the acts of the 
Council referred to in Article 42; - take decisions necessary 
for carrying out 
the tasks 
entrusted to the ESCB under this 
Treaty and 
this Statute; - make recommendations and deliver opinions. 
34.2 A regulation shall have general 
application. It shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable 
in all Member 
States. Recommendations and opinions shall 
have no binding force. 
A decision shall 
be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed. Articles 190 to 192 of this Treaty shall apply 
to regulations and decisions adopted by the ECB. The ECB may decide 
to publish 
its decisions, recommendations 
and opinions. 
34.3 Within the limits 
and under the 
conditions adopted by the Council under the 
procedure laid down in Article 42, the ECB shall be entitled to 
impose fines or 
periodic penalty payments 
on undertakings for failure to comply with obligations under its regulations 
and decisions. ARTICLE 35 - Judicial control 
and related matters 35.1 The acts or 
omissions of the ECB shall be open to review or interpretation by the Court of Justice in the cases and under the conditions laid down in this Treaty. The ECB 
may institute proceedings in the cases and 
under the conditions laid 
down in this Treaty. 35.2 Disputes between 
the ECB, on 
the one 
hand, and its creditors, 
debtors or any other 
person, on the other, shall be decided by the competent national 
courts, save where jurisdiction has been 
conferred upon the Court of Justice. 35.3 The ECB shall 
be subject to the liability regime provided for 
in Article 215 of this Treaty. The national central banks shall be liable according 
to their 
respective national 
laws. 35.4 The Court 
of Justice shall have jurisdiction to give judgement pursuant to any 
arbitration clause contained 
in a contract concluded 
by or on behalf of the 
ECB, whether that contract be governed by public or private law. 35.5 A decision of the ECB to bring 
an action before the Court of Justice shall 
be taken by the Governing Council. 
Annex I11 35.6 The Court of Justice shall 
have jurisdiction 
in disputes concerning the fulfilment by a national central 
bank of obligations under this Statute. 
If the ECB considers that a national central 
bank has failed to fulfil an obligation under this Statute, it shall deliver 
a reasoned opinion on the matter after giving the 
national central 
bank concerned 
the opportunity to submit its observations. 
If the national central bank concerned does not comply with the opinion within the period laid 
down by the ECB, the latter may 
bring the matter before the Court of Justice. ARTICLE 36 - Staff 36.1 The 
Governing Council, on a 
proposal from the Executive Board, shall lay 
down the conditions of employment of the 
staff of the 
ECB. 36.2 The 
Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction 
in any dispute 
between the ECB 
and its servants 
within the limits and under the conditions laid down in the conditions of employment. ARTICLE 37 - Seat Before the 
end of 
1992, the decision as to where the seat 
of the ECB will be established shall 
be taken by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the 
level of Heads of State or of Government. ARTICLE 38 - Professional secrecy 38.1 Members of the governing bodies 
and the staff of the ECB and the national central 
banks shall be required, even 
after their duties 
have ceased, not to disclose information 
of the kind covered 
by the obligation of professional secrecy. 38.2 Persons having access 
to data covered by Community legislation 
imposing an obligation of secrecy shall 
be subject to such legislation. 
ARTICLE 39 - Signatories The ECB shall 
be legally committed to third parties 
by the President or by two members 
of the 
Executive Board or by the signatures of two members of the 
staff of the ECB who have been 
duly authorised by the President to sign 
on behalf of the ECB. ARTICLE 40 - Privileges and immunities The ECB 
shall enjoy in the territories of the Member States 
such privileges and immunities as are necessary for 
the performance 
of its tasks, under the 
conditions laid down in the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities annexed to the Treaty 
establishing a Single Council 
and a Single Commission 
of the European Communities. 
CHAPTER V111 - AMENDMENT OF 
THE STATUTE AND COMPLEMENTARY LEGISLATION 
ARTICLE 41 - Simplified amendment 
procedure 41.1 In accordance with Article 106(5) of this Treaty, Articles 5.1, 
5.2, 5.3, 17, 18, 19.1, 22, 23, 
24, 26, 32.2, 32.3, 32.4, 32.6, 
33.l(a) and 36 of this Statute may 
be amended by the Council, acting either 
by a qualified majority 
on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting 
Annex 111 the Commission, or unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the ECB. In either case 
the assent of the European Parliament 
shall be required. 41.2 A recommendation made 
by the ECB under this Article shall require a unanimous decision 
by the Governing Council. ARTICLE 42 - Complementary legislation 
In accordance with Article 106(6) of this Treaty, immediately after the decision on the date for the beginning of the third 
stage, the Council, acting by a qualified majority either on a 
proposal from the Commission and after consulting 
the European Parliament 
and the ECB, or on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting the European Parliament 
and the 
Commission, shall adopt the provisions referred to in Articles 4, 5.4, 19.2, 20, 28.1, 29.2, 30.4 and 
34.3 of this Statute. CHAPTER IX - TRANSITIONAL AND OTHER PROVISIONS FOR 
THE ESCB ARTICLE 43 - General provisions 43.1 A derogation as referred 
to in Article 109k(l) of this Treaty 
shall entail that the following 
Articles of this Statute shall not confer any rights or impose any obligations 
on the Member State concerned: 
3, 6, 9.2, 12.1, 14.3, 
16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 
26.2, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 
50 and 52. 
43.2 The central banks of Member States 
with a derogation as 
specified in Article 109k(l) of this Treaty shall 
retain their powers 
in the field of monetary policy according 
to national law. 43.3 In accordance with Article 109k(4) of this 
Treaty, "Member 
Statesn shall be read as "Member States without a derogation" in the following Articles 
of this Statute: 
3, 11.2, 19, 34.2 and 50. 43.4 "National central banks" 
shall be read as "central 
banks of Member States without 
a derogationn in 
the following Articles 
of this Statute: 9.2, 10.1, 10.3, 12.1, 16, 17, 18, 
22, 23, 27, 30, 31, 
32, 33.2 and 52. 43.5 "Shareholders" shall be read as "central banks of Member States without a derogation" in 
Articles 10.3 and 33.1. 43.6 "Subscribed capital 
of the ECB" shall be read as "capital 
of the ECB 
subscribed by the central banks of Member States without 
a derogationn in Articles 10.3 and 
30.2. ARTICLE 44 - Transitional tasks 
of the 
ECB The ECB shall take over 
those tasks of 
the EM1 which, because of the derogations of one or more Member States, still have to be performed in the third stage. 
The ECB shall give 
advice in the preparations for 
the abrogation of the derogations specified in Article 1091 of this Treaty. 
ARTICLE 45 - The General Council of the ECB 
45.1 Without prejudice to Article 106(3) of this Treaty, the General Council shall be constituted as a third decision-making body of the ECB. Annex I11 45.2 The General Council 
shall comprise the President and Vice-President of the ECB and the 
Governors of 
t.he national central 
banks. The other members 
of the Executive Board may participate, without having the right to vote, 
in meetings of the General Council. 45.3 The responsibilities 
of the General Council are 
listed in full in Article 47 of this Statute. ARTICLE 46 - Rules of procedure of the General Council 46.1 The President 
or, in his absence, the Vice-President of the ECB 
shall chair the 
General Council of the ECB. 46.2 The President 
of the Council and a member 
of the 
Commission may participate, without having the right 
to vote, in 
meetings of the General Council. 46.3 The President 
shall prepare the 
meetings of the 
General Council. 46.4 By 
way of derogation from Article 
12.3, the 
General Council 
shall adopt its Rules 
of Procedure. 
46.5 The Secretariat of the General Council shall 
be provided by the ECB . ARTICLE 47 - Responsibilities of the General Council 
47.1 The General Council 
shall: - perform the tasks referred 
to in Article 44; - contribute to the advisory 
functions referred to in Articles 4 
and 25.1. 47.2 The 
General Council shall contribute to: - the collection 
of statistical information as referred to in 
Article 5; - the reporting activities of the ECB 
as referred to in Article 15; - the establishment 
of the necessary rules for the application of Article 26 as referred to in Article 26.4; - the taking of all other measures 
necessary for the application of Article 29 as referred to in Article 29.4; - the laying down of the conditions of employment of the staff of the ECB as referred to in Article 36. 47.3 The General Council shall contribute to the necessary 
preparations for irrevocably fixing 
the exchange rates 
of the 
currencies of Member States with a derogation against 
the currencies, or the single 
currency, of the Member States without a derogation, 
as referred to in Article 1091(5) of this Treaty. 47.4 The General Council 
shall be informed by the President of the ECB of decisions of the 
Governing Council. ARTICLE 48 - Transitional provisions for the capital 
of the ECB 
In accordance with Article 29.1 each national central 
bank shall be assigned a weighting 
in the key for 
subscription of the ECB's capital. By 
way of derogation from Article 28.3, central banks of 
Member States with a derogation shall not 
pay up their subscribed capital unless 
the General Council, 
acting by a majority representing at least two thirds 
Annex I11 of the subscribed 
capital of the ECB and at least half 
of the shareholders, 
decides that 
a minimal percentage has 
to be paid up as a contribution to the operational costs 
of the 
ECB. ARTICLE 49 - Deferred payment of capital, reserves and provisions 
of the ECB 49.1 The central 
bank of 
a Member State whose derogation has 
been abrogated shall pay up its subscribed share of the 
capital of the ECB 
to the same extent as the 
central banks of other Member States without 
a derogation, and 
shall transfer 
to the ECB 
foreign reserve assets 
in accordance with Article 30.1. The sum 
to be transferred shall be determined by multiplying the ECU value 
at current exchange 
rates of the 
foreign reserve assets 
which have already been transferred 
to the ECB 
in accordance with Article 30.1, 
by the ratio between 
the number 
of shares subscribed 
by the national central 
bank concerned 
and the number of shares 
already paid up by the other national central 
banks. 49.2 In addition to 
the payment 
to be made in accordance with Article 49.1, the central bank concerned 
shall contribute to the 
reserves of the ECB, 
to those provisions equivalent 
to reserves, and to 
the amount still to 
be appropriated to the 
reserves and 
provisions corresponding to the balance 
of the profit and loss account 
as at 31st December of the year 
prior to the abrogation 
of the derogation. The sum to 
be contributed shall 
be determined by multiplying the amount of the reserves, as defined above 
and as stated 
in the approved balance sheet of 
the ECB, 
by the 
ratio between the number 
of shares subscribed 
by the central bank concerned 
and the number 
of shares already 
paid up by the other central banks. ARTICLE 50 - Initial appointment of the members 
of the Executive Board When the Executive 
Board of the ECB is being established, the President, the Vice-President 
and the other members of the 
Executive Board shall be appointed by common accord of the governments of 
the Member States 
at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government, on a recommendation from 
the Council and after consulting 
the European Parliament and 
the Council of the EMI. The President 
of the Executive 
Board shall be 
appointed for 
eight years. By way of derogation from 
Article 11.2, the Vice-President shall 
be appointed for four years 
and the other members of 
the Executive 
Board for 
terms of 
office of between 
five and eight years. 
No term 
of office shall be renewable. The 
number of members 
of the Executive Board may be smaller than 
provided for in Article 11.1, but in no circumstance shall 
it be less than four. ARTICLE 51 - Derogation from 
Article 32 51.1 If, after the start 
of the third stage, the Governing Council 
decides that 
the application of Article 
32 results in significant changes in national central 
banks' relative income positions, the amount 
of income to be allocated pursuant to Article 32 shall be 
reduced by a uniform percentage which shall not exceed 60% in the first financial 
year after the start of the 
third stage and 
which shall decrease by at least 12 percentage points in each subsequent financial year. 51.2 Article 51.1 shall be applicable for 
not more than five 
financial years after 
the start of the third stage. 
Annex I11 ARTICLE 52 - Exchange of bank notes in Conrmunity currencies Following the irrevocable fixing of exchange 
rates, the Governing Council shall take 
the necessary measures 
to ensure that 
bank notes denominated in currencies with irrevocably fixed exchange rates are 
exchanged by the national central 
banks at their respective 
par values. ARTICLE 53 - Applicability of the transitional provisions 
If and as long as there are Member States 
with a derogation Articles 43 to 48 shall be applicable. Annex IV TREATY ON EUROPEAN UNION AS SIGNED ON 7TH FEBRUARY 
1992 PROTOCOL ON THE STATUTE OF THE 
EUROPEAN MONETARY INSTITUTE 
THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES, 
DESIRING to lay down the Statute of the 
European Monetary Institute, 
HAVE AGREED upon the following provisions, 
which shall be annexed to the 
Treaty establishing 
the European Community: ARTICLE 1 - Constitution and name 1.1 The European 
Monetary Institute (EMI) 
shall be established 
in accordance with Article 109f of this 
Treaty; it shall perform its functions 
and carry out its activities 
in accordance with the provisions of this 
Treaty and of 
this Statute. 
1.2 The members 
of the 
EM1 shall be the central banks of the 
Member States ("national central banks"). For the 
purposes of 
this Statute, 
the Institut monetaire luxembourgeois shall 
be regarded as the central 
bank of 
Luxembourg. 1.3 Pursuantto Article109f of this 
Treaty, both the Committee 
of Governors and the European 
Monetary Co-operation Fund 
(EMCF) shall be dissolved. All assets 
and liabilities of the 
EMCF shall pass 
automatically to the EMI. ARTICLE 2 - Objectives The EM1 shall contribute 
to the realisation 
of the conditions necessary for the transition 
to the third stage of Economic 
and Monetary Union, in 
particular by: - strengthening the co-ordination 
of monetary policies 
with a view to ensuring price stability; - making the preparations required 
for the establishment 
of the European System 
of Central Banks 
(ESCB), and for 
the conduct of a single monetary 
policy and the creation of 
a single currency in the third 
stage; - overseeing the development of the 
ECU. ARTICLE 3 - General principles 3.1 The EM1 shall carry 
out the 
tasks and 
functions conferred upon it by this Treaty 
and this Statute without 
prejudice to the responsibility 
of the competent authorities for 
the conduct 
of the monetary 
policy within the respective Member 
States. 3.2 The EM1 shall act 
in accordance with the objectives and 
principles stated in Article 2 of the 
Statute of the 
ESCB. ARTICLE 4 - Primary tasks 4.1 In accordance with Article 109f(2) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall : - strengthen co-operation 
between the 
national central banks; 
Annex IV - strengthen the co-ordination 
of the 
monetary policies of 
the Member States 
with the aim of ensuring price 
stability; - monitor the functioning of 
the ~uro~ean Monetary System 
(EMS); - hold consultations concerning 
issues falling 
within the competence of the national central 
banks and 
affecting the stability of 
financial institutions and markets; 
- take over the tasks of 
the EMCF; in particular it shall perform 
the functions 
referred to in Articles 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3; - facilitate the use 
of the ECU and oversee its development, 
including the smooth functioning of the 
ECU clearing system. The EM1 shall also: 
- hold regular 
consultations concerning the 
course of monetary 
policies and the use 
of monetary policy instruments; - normally be consulted 
by the national monetary authorities 
before they take decisions 
on the course of 
monetary policy in the context 
of the common framework for ex ante co-ordination. 
4.2 At the latest 
by 31st December 1996, 
the EM1 shall specify the regulatory, organisational 
and logistical framework necessary for 
the ESCB 
to perform its 
tasks in the third stage, in accordance with the principle 
of an open market economy with free competition. This 
framework shall 
be submitted by the Council 
of the EM1 for decision to 
the ECB at the date 
of its establishment. In accordance with Article 109f(3) of this Treaty, the 
EM1 shall in particular: - prepare the instruments 
and the procedures 
necessary for 
carrying out 
a single 
monetary policy in the third 
stage; - promote the harmonisation, where necessary, 
of the rules 
and practices governing the 
collection, compilation 
and distribution of statistics 
in the areas 
within its field of competence; - prepare the rules for 
operations to be undertaken by the national central 
banks in the framework of the 
ESCB; - promote the efficiency 
of cross-border payments; 
- supervise the technical preparation 
of ECU bank notes. ARTICLE 5 - Advisory functions 
5.1 In accordance with Article 109f(4) of this Treaty, the Council 
of the EM1 may formulate opinions or recommendations 
on the overall 
orientation of monetary 
policy and 
exchange rate policy as well as on 
related measures introduced in each Member 
State. The EM1 may submit opinions or recommendations 
to governments and to 
the Council on policies which might affect 
the internal or external monetary 
situation in the Community and, in particular, the functioning of the EMS. 5.2 The Council 
of the EM1 may also make recommendations to 
the monetary authorities 
of the 
Member States concerning the conduct of their monetary policy. 5.3 In accordance with Article 109f(6) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall be consulted by the Council regarding 
any proposed Community 
act within its field 
of competence. 
Within the limits and 
under the conditions set out by the Council acting 
by a qualified majority on a proposal 
from the Commission 
and after consulting 
the European Parliament 
and the EMI, the 
EM1 shall be consulted by the authorities 
of the Member States on any draft legislative 
Annex IV provision within its field 
of competence, in particular with regard to Article 4.2. 5.4 In accordance with Article 109f(5) of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 may publish its opinions 
and its recommendations. ARTICLE 6 - Operational and technical functions 
6.1 The EM1 shall: - provide for the multilateralisation of positions 
resulting from 
interventions by the national central 
banks in Community currencies and the multilateralisation of intra-Community settlements; - administer the very short-term financing mechanism 
provided for 
by the Agreement 
of 13th March 1979 between the central 
banks of the Member 
States of the European Economic Community laying down the operating procedures 
for the European Monetary System 
(hereinafter referred 
to as "EMS Agreementn) and the short-term 
monetary support mechanism provided for in the Agreement 
between the central 
banks of the Member States 
of the European 
Economic Community of 
9th February 1970, as amended; 
- perform the functions referred 
to in Article 11 of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 1969188 of 24th June 
1988 establishing a 
single facility 
providing medium-term financial assistance for 
Member States' balances of 
payments. 6.2 The 
EM1 may receive 
monetary reserves 
from the national 
central banks and issue ECUs against such 
assets for the 
purpose of implementing 
the EMS Agreement. These ECUs may be used 
by the EM1 and the national 
central banks as a 
means of settlement and 
for transactions between them 
and the 
EMI. The EM1 shall take the necessary administrative measures for 
the implementation of this 
paragraph. 6.3 The EM1 may grant to the 
monetary authorities 
of third 
countries and to international 
monetary institutions the 
status of 
"Other Holders" of ECUs 
and fix the terms and conditions under which such ECUs may be acquired, held 
or used by Other Holders. 
6.4 The EM1 shall be entitled to hold and manage foreign 
exchange reserves as 
an agent for 
and at the request 
of national central 
banks. Profits and losses 
regarding these reserves shall 
be for the account 
of the national central 
bank depositing 
the reserves. The EM1 shall perform this 
function on 
the basis of bilateral 
contracts in accordance with rules laid 
down in a decision of the 
EMI. These rules shall ensure that transactions 
with these reserves 
shall not interfere with the monetary policy and 
exchange rate 
policy of 
the competent monetary 
authority of 
any Member State and 
shall be consistent with the objectives 
of the EM1 and the proper 
functioning of the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
of the 
EMS. ARTICLE 7 - Other tasks 
7.1 Once a year the 
EM1 shall address a 
report to the Council 
on the state 
of the 
preparations for the 
third stage. These reports 
shall include an assessment of the progress towards 
convergence in the Community, and cover 
in particular the 
adaptation of monetary policy instruments and 
the preparation 
of the procedures necessary for carrying out 
a single 
monetary policy in the third stage, as well as 
the statutory 
requirements Annex IV to be fulfilled for national 
central banks 
to become an integral part of 
the ESCB. 7.2 In accordance with the Council decisions referred 
to in Article 109f(7) of this 
Treaty, the EM1 may perform other tasks for 
the preparation of the third stage. ARTICLE 8 - Independence The members 
of the Council of 
the EM1 who are the representatives of their institutions 
shall, with respect to 
their activities, act according 
to their 
own responsibilities. In exercising the powers and performing the tasks and duties conferred 
upon them 
by this Treaty and 
this Statute, the Council of the EM1 may not seek or take any 
instructions from Community institutions or 
bodies or governments of Member States. The Community institutions and bodies 
as well 
as the governments of the 
Member States undertake to respect this principle and 
not to seek to influence the 
Council of the EM1 in the performance of its tasks. ARTICLE 9 - Administration 9.1 In accordance with Article 109f(l) of this 
Treaty, the EM1 shall be directed and 
managed by the Council of 
the EMI. 9.2 The Council 
of the EM1 shall consist of a 
President and the Governors of the national 
central banks, one 
of whom shall be Vice-President. If a Governor is 
prevented from attending 
a meeting, he may nominate another 
representative of 
his institution. 9.3 The President shall 
be appointed 
by common accord of the governments of the Member 
States at the level of Heads of 
State or of 
Government, on a recommendation from, 
as the case 
may be, the Committee of 
Governors or the Council 
of the EMI, and after consulting the 
European Parliament and the 
Council. The President 
shall be selected 
from among persons 
of recognised standing and professional experience 
in monetary or banking matters. Only nationals 
of Member States may be President 
of the EMI. The Council of the 
EM1 shall appoint 
the Vice-President. The President and 
Vice-President shall be appointed for a 
period of three years. 9.4 The President 
shall perform 
his duties on 
a full-time basis. He shall not engage 
in any occupation, 
whether gainful or 
not, unless exemption is 
exceptionally granted 
by the Council of the 
EMI. 9.5 The President 
shall: - prepare and chair 
the meetings of the 
Council of the 
EMI; - without prejudice to Article 22, present the views of 
the EM1 externally; - be responsible for 
the day-to-day management 
of the 
EMI. In the absence 
of the President, his duties shall 
be performed 
by the Vice-President. 
9.6 The terms and conditions of employment of 
the President, 
in particular his salary, pension 
and other social security 
benefits, shall be the subject of a 
contract with the EM1 and shall be fixed by the Council of the EM1 on a proposal from a Committee comprising three 
members appointed by the Committee of Governors 
or the Council of the EMI, as the 
case may Annex IV be, and three members 
appointed by the Council. The President 
shall not have the right to 
vote on 
matters referred to in this paragraph. 
9.7 If the President no 
longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of his duties 
or if he has been 
guilty of serious misconduct, the Court of Justice may, on application by the Council of the 
EMI, compulsorily retire him. 
9.8 The Rules 
of Procedure of the EM1 shall be adopted by the Council of the EMI. 
ARTICLE 10 - Meetings of the Council 
of the EMI and voting procedures 
10.1 The 
Council of the EM1 shall meet at least ten times 
a year. The proceedings of Council meetings 
shall be confidential. The 
Council of the EM1 may, acting unanimously, decide to make the outcome 
of its deliberations public. 10.2 Each member 
of the Council of the EM1 or his nominee shall have 
one vote. 10.3 Save as 
otherwise provided for in this Statute, the Council of the EM1 shall act by a simple majority 
of its members. 10.4 Decisions to be taken in the context of Articles 4.2, 5.4, 6.2 
and 6.3 shall require unanimity of the members of the Council of the EMI. 
The adoption of opinions and recommendations under Articles 
5.1 and 5.2, the adoption of decisions under Articles 
6.4, 16 and 23.6 and the adoption of guidelines under Article 
15.3 shall require a qualified majority of two-thirds of the members of the Council of the EMI. 
ARTICLE 11 - Inter-institutional co-operation and reporting 
requirements 11.1 The 
President of the Council and a member of the Commission may participate, without having the right 
to vote, in meetings of the Council of the EMI. 11.2 The 
President of the EM1 shall be invited to participate 
in Council meetings 
when the Council is discussing 
matters relating 
to the objectives and tasks of the EMI. 
11.3 At 
a date to be established in the Rules of Procedure, the EM1 shall prepare 
an annual report 
on its activities and on monetary and financial conditions 
in the Community. The annual report, together with 
the annual accounts 
of the EMI, shall be addressed to the 
European Parliament, the Council and the 
Commission and also to the European Council. 
The President of the EM1 may, at the request of the European Parliament or on his own initiative, 
be heard by the competent Committees 
of the European Parliament. 11.4 Reports published by the EM1 shall be made available 
to interested parties free of charge. ARTICLE 12 - Currency denomination The operations of the 
EM1 shall be expressed in ECU. ARTICLE 13 - Seat Before the end of 1992, the decision as to where the seat of the EM1 will be established shall 
be taken by common accord of the Annex IV governments of the Member States 
at the level 
of Heads of State or of 
Government. ARTICLE 14 - Legal capacity The EMI, which 
in accordance with Article 109f(l) of this 
Treaty shall 
have legal personality, 
shall enjoy 
in each of the Member 
States the 
most extensive legal 
capacity accorded 
to legal 
persons under their law; it may, in 
particular, acquire 
or dispose of movable or immovable property 
and may be a party to legal 
proceedings. ARTICLE 15 - Legal acts 
15.1 In the performance of 
its tasks, and under 
the conditions laid down in this Statute, the EM1 shall: - deliver opinions; 
- make recommendations; 
- adopt guidelines, 
and take 
decisions, which 
shall be addressed to the national central 
banks. 15.2 Opinions and recommendations of the 
EM1 shall have no binding force . 15.3 The Council of the 
EM1 may adopt guidelines laying 
down the methods for the implementation 
of the conditions necessary for 
the ESCB 
to perform its functions in the third stage. 
EM1 guidelines shall have 
no binding force; they shall 
be submitted for decision to 
the ECB. 
15.4 Without prejudice to Article 3.1, a decision of the EM1 shall be binding in its entirety upon those to whom it is addressed. Articles 
190 and 191 of this Treaty shall 
apply to these decisions. 
ARTICLE 16 - Financial resources 16.1 The EM1 shall be endowed with its own resources. The size 
of the resources 
of the EM1 shall be determined by the Council of the 
EM1 with a view to ensuring 
the income deemed necessary to cover 
the administrative expenditure incurred 
in the performance of the 
tasks and functions 
of the 
EM1 . 16.2 The resources 
of the EM1 determined in accordance with Article 16.1 shall be provided out 
of contributions by the national central 
banks in accordance with the key referred to in Article 29.1 of the 
Statute of the ESCB 
and be paid up at the establishment of 
the EMI. For this purpose, the statistical 
data to be used for the determination 
of the key shall be provided by the Commission, 
in accordance with the rules adopted 
by the Council, acting by a qualified majority on a proposal 
from the Commission and after consulting 
the European Parliament, the Committee of Governors and the Committee referred to in Article 109c of this Treaty. 
16.3 The Council of the 
EM1 shall determine 
the form in which contributions shall 
be paid up. 
ARTICLE 17 - Annual accounts and auditing 17.1 The financial year 
of the EM1 shall begin 
on the first day 
of January and 
end on the last day of 
December. 17.2 The Council 
of the 
EM1 shall adopt an annual budget before the beginning of each financial year. Annex IV 
17.3 The annual accounts shall 
be drawn up in accordance with the principles established 
by the Council of the EMI. 
The annual accounts shall be approved by the Council of the EM1 and shall thereafter 
be published. 17.4 The annual accounts shall 
be audited by independent external auditors approved 
by the Council 
of the EMI. The auditors shall 
have full power to examine all 
books and accounts of the 
EM1 and to 
obtain full information about its 
transactions. The provisions of 
Article 188b of this Treaty shall 
only apply 
to an examination of the operational efficiency of 
the management 
of the EM1 . 17.5 Any surplus of the 
EM1 shall be transferred in the following 
order: (a) an amount to 
be determined 
by the Council of the 
EM1 shall be transferred to 
the general reserve fund 
of the 
EMI; (b) any remaining surplus shall 
be distributed to the 
national central banks in accordance with the key referred to 
in Article 16.2. 17.6 In the event of 
a loss incurred 
by the EMI, the shortfall shall 
be offset against the general reserve 
fund of the EMI. Any remaining shortfall shall 
be made good by contributions from the national central banks, in accordance with the key as 
referred to 
in Article 16.2. ARTICLE 18 - Staff 18.1 The Council 
of the EM1 shall lay 
down the conditions of employment of the staff of the 
EMI. 18.2 The Court 
of Justice shall 
have jurisdiction in any dispute 
between the EM1 and its servants 
within the limits and 
under the conditions laid down in the conditions of employment. ARTICLE 19 - Judicial control 
and related 
matters 19.1 The acts or 
omissions of the EM1 shall be open to review 
or interpretation by the Court of Justice in the cases and under the conditions laid down in this Treaty. The 
EM1 may institute proceedings 
in the cases and under the conditions laid 
down in this Treaty. 19.2 Disputes between the EMI, on the one 
hand, and its creditors, 
debtors or any 
other person, 
on the other, shall fall within 
the jurisdiction of the competent national 
courts, save where jurisdiction has been conferred 
upon the Court of Justice. 
19.3 The EM1 shall be subject to the liability regime 
provided for in Article 215 of this Treaty. 19.4 The Court 
of Justice shall have jurisdiction to give 
judgement pursuant to any arbitration clause 
contained in a contract concluded 
by or on behalf of 
the EMI, whether that contract be governed by public or 
private law. 
19.5 A decision of the EM1 to bring an action before the Court 
of Justice shall be taken by the Council of the 
EMI. Annex IV ARTICLE 20 - Professional secrecy 20.1 Members of 
the Council 
of the EM1 and the staff of the 
EM1 shall be required, even after 
their duties have ceased, not to disclose 
information of the kind 
covered by the obligation of professional secrecy. 
20.2 Persons having access 
to data covered by Community legislation 
imposing an obligation of secrecy shall 
be subject to such legislation. 
ARTICLE 21 - Privileges and 
inununities The EM1 shall enjoy in the territories of the 
Member States such privileges 
and immunities as are necessary for the 
performance of its tasks, under 
the conditions laid down in the Protocol on the Privileges and 
Immunities of the 
European Communities annexed 
to the 
Treaty establishing a 
Single Council and 
a Single Commission of the European Communities. 
ARTICLE 22 - Signatories The EM1 shall be legally committed 
to third parties 
by the President or the Vice-President 
or by the signatures of 
two members 
of the staff of 
the EM1 who have been duly authorised 
by the President to sign on 
behalf of 
the EMI. ARTICLE 23 - Liquidation of the EMI 23.1 In accordance with 
Article 1091 of this 
Treaty, the 
EM1 shall go into liquidation 
on the establishment of the 
ECB. All assets 
and liabilities of 
the EM1 shall then pass automatically to the ECB. The latter shall liquidate 
the EM1 according to the 
provisions of this Article. The liquidation 
shall be completed by the beginning of the third stage. 
23.2 The mechanism for 
the creation of ECUs against gold and US dollars as provided for by Article 17 of the EMS Agreement shall be unwound by the first day 
of the third 
stage in accordance with Article 20 of the said Agreement. 
23.3 All claims and liabilities 
arising from 
the very short-term financing mechanism 
and the short-term monetary 
support mechanism, under the Agreements referred to in Article 6.1, shall be settled 
by the first 
day of the third stage. 23.4 All remaining assets of the 
EM1 shall be disposed of and 
all remaining liabilities 
of the 
EM1 shall be settled. 
23.5 The proceeds of 
the liquidation described in Article 23.4 shall be distributed to the national central 
banks in accordance with the key referred to 
in Article 16.2. 23.6 The Council 
of the 
EM1 may take 
the measures necessary for 
the application of Articles 23.4 and 23.5. 23.7 Upon the establishment 
of the ECB, the President of the EM1 shall relinquish his 
office. 