   
  
   
  EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE
-GENERAL FOR ECONOMIC AND 
FINANCIAL AFFAIRS              
                                September 2009 Interim forecast  Press conference of 14 September 2009 
 Interim forecast, September 2009   
 
 Coming out of recession but uncertainty remains high 
 The EU economy appears to be at a turning point. Si
gns of improvements in the economic situation 
have become increasingly apparent si
nce the start of the autumn and 
fears of a prolonged, deep 
recession are fading. Although there is still a high de
gree of uncertainty with significant headwinds 
present, tailwinds have gained strength more recen
tly. In particular, important policy interventions 
have succeeded in achieving some stabilisation in
 the financial system and in providing support to 
economic activity. Notably, data for the second quart
er indicate a significant easing in the pace of 
contraction of EU GDP (to -0.2% quarter-on-quarter a
fter -2.4% in the first quarter). The question is 
whether this positive surprise reflects mostly one-off fa
ctors Œ or whether it is the start of a sustained 
recovery. 
There are several reasons to be 
somewhat more optimistic about the near-term outlook. Financial 
conditions have improved markedly over the summ
er with several financial indicators returning to 
pre-crisis levels. With the global (non-EU) economy st
abilising, the outlook for external trade is more 
encouraging. The inventory cycle is set to turn
 (although progress is uneven across countries). Both 
business and consumer confidence indicators have c
ontinued to improve in recent months across 
almost all sectors and countries, which also bodes we
ll for the near-term outlook. Last but not least, 
the implementation of several already announced 
discretionary measures is planned for the current 
quarter.  Based on an update of the outlook for 2009 for the seven largest Member States, the growth 
momentum for EU GDP has therefore been revised up 
for the second half of this year. However, the 
outcome at the turn of the year proved so weak
 that, despite the new outlook and the better-than-
expected outcome for the second quarter, the fall 
in GDP remains unchanged at -4% in both the EU 
and the euro area for the year as a whole.  
As with the GDP forecast, the outlook for consum
er-price inflation remains unchanged at 0.9% in the 
EU for 2009 (and 0.4% in the euro area). Revisi
ons at the Member-State level are moderate and 
broadly offset each other. On the back of base eff
ects from past hikes in food and energy prices, HICP 
inflation is expected to reach a low during the thir
d quarter of this year. Substantial slack in the 
economy and the expected deceleration in wage costs poi
nt to a further decline in underlying inflation, 
while the headline inflation rate
 is expected to increase following 
higher commodity prices (compared 
to the assumptions of the spring forecast) and an exp
ected reversal in base effects this autumn.  
Looking into next year, however, uncertainty is 
rife. There are reasons to believe that the recovery 
could prove volatile and sub par. The full impact 
of the economic crisis on labour markets and public 
finances is, at least partly, still to be faced. Risi
ng unemployment could weigh on consumption, while 
ample spare capacity and an anaemic credit supply 
might restrain investment. A further negative 
feedback loop can therefore not be ruled out. The 
financial crisis could also have long-lasting adverse 
effects on potential growth. On the other hand, po
licy measures could prove more effective in 
restoring financial health, thereby supporting economic 
activity, and in improving the functioning of 
the economy. Summing up, the strength of the recovery 
could surprise on the upside in the near term, 
but its sustainability is yet to be tested Œ and will 
be considered in the upcoming fully-fledged forecast 
in which all countries are asse
ssed over a forecast horizon that includes 2011 (planned for the 
beginning of November). 
 
 Interim forecast, September 2009      2 The global recession is coming to an end 
Having contracted sharpl
y last autumn, recent 
months have seen a stabilisation in global economic 
activity, with a recovery in some countries. This 

results in a slight upward revision to world growth 
in 2009, compared to the spring forecast.  
Short-term indicators
 of global activity have clearly 
turned. The global PMI for manufacturing moved 

back into expansionary territory in August. 
Estimates by the CPB (Netherlands Bureau for 
Economic Policy Analysis) show that world 
industrial production increased by 2% quarter-on-
quarter (q-o-q) in 2009Q2 - the strongest rise since 

2003 - after two consecutive quarterly drops of 
above 5%. Among regions, emerging Asia recorded 
the strongest rebound in production. Moreover, 

world trade almost stabilised in 2009Q2, following 
steep falls in the previous two quarters.  
 
Better-than-expected growth outcomes in the first 
half of 2009, notably in Asia, and a revised outlook 
for the second half of the year in, amongst others, 

the US, underpin the current stabilisation in 
economic activity (see Gr
aph 1). Growth could 
recover more markedly in 
the second half of 2009 
in some regions of the world, such as Asia, due to a 
greater resumption of trade flows and a stronger 
rebound in industrial production. 
Graph 1: Growth in selected economies 
0246
810121416070809-10
-8-6-4
-20246China (lhs)
Japan (rhs)
EU (rhs)
US (rhs)
y-o-y% y-o-y%
 Source: Commission services. 
In the advanced economies (US, Japan and the EU) 
the release of better-than-
expected second-quarter 
data came together with downward revisions to 
previous quarters. However, economic activity is 
improving and inventory data suggest that the 
destocking cycle is bottoming out, which bodes 

well for a turnaround in the coming months.  
 Developments in the major non-European 
economies: will current trends lead to a sustained 
recovery?  
After the deepest and longest recession in more 
than sixty years, the 
US economy is expected to 
expand again in the second half of 2009. Industrial 
production started to increase in July and the 
manufacturing PMI has recovered steadily (to 
above 50 in August from an all-time low last 

December). Capital goods orders indicate a 
stabilisation of business equipment investment, 
while a massive liquidation of inventories has laid 

the foundation for a rebound in manufacturing 
output. Export volumes are increasing again and the 
housing market seems to have bottomed out. 

Government spending is 
also accelerating following 
February's massive fiscal stimulus package. 
However, the labour market is still depressed with 

unemployment rising to 9.7% in August. Payroll 
employment continues to fall, albeit at a diminished 
rate. As a result, consumer spending remains 

fundamentally weak, although the fiscal stimulus 
and subsidies for car purchases may lead to a 
modest expansion of real personal consumption 

expenditure in the third quarter.  
After four quarters of negative quarterly growth, 
Japanese GDP grew by 0.9% q-o-q in 2009Q2. 
Exports contributed positively to growth, while 
private demand and inventories acted as a drag. 
Looking ahead, declining profits, more difficult 

access to credit for SMEs, still-weak external 
demand and inventories are expected to continue to 
weigh on the business environment. Investment 

spending is projected to be cut further. While 
household and public consumption have remained 
relatively resilient due to the implementation of 

stimulus packages, the situation in the labour 
market is deteriorating markedly, with the 
unemployment rate reaching its highest in the past 

twenty years. In Emerging
 Asia
, China is leading the way, while 
growth in India and Indonesia remains robust. Due 
Interim forecast, September 2009      3to the fast implementation of its fiscal stimulus 
package, China was the 
first economy to rebound 
strongly in the first half of 2009. However, the 

package is likely to further fuel some existing 
imbalances. Moreover, while expansive fiscal and 
relatively loose monetary policies are currently 

having a positive impact on economic activity, the 
announced reduction in overcapacities could, at a 
later stage, lead to lower growth.  
For Russia
, growth is further downgraded, given 
the weaker-than-foreseen GDP outcome in 2009Q2. 
The outlook for 
Latin America
 has also deteriorated 
compared to earlier this year. Within the region, 
developments are mixed, with some signs of 
recovery in Brazil.  
The main issues now are whether the global 
recovery will be sustained and what shape it will 
take. The current positive signs could lead to a 
lasting recovery, or could signal only a temporary, 

policy-induced respite, with shockwaves still to be 
expected. It is therefor
e important to carefully 
assess confirmation of the strength of the 

underlying recovery in the coming months. The 
global economy could relapse somewhat towards 
the end of 2009 or further out, as stimulus measures 

fade and re-stocking loses strength. 
 Commodity prices are driven up, on the back of 
improved sentiment  
While 
oil
 prices had plunged to around $40/bl. at 
the beginning of the year, they later stabilised 
before rallying recently. Th
e price of Brent reached 
a high for this year at $75/bl on 7 August on the 

back of improved sentiment. It then eased to below 
$70/bl (and was at $66.9/bl on 7 September). 
Perceived improvements in the short-term outlook, 

as well as OPEC's production cuts and sustained 
Chinese demand, have lifted oil prices. One 
important characteristic of the oil market is the 

volatility in spot prices, which adds uncertainty to 
the current economic outlook. Based on futures 
prices, oil prices are assumed to average $62/bl in 

2009, an increase of 17% 
compared with the spring 
forecast (see Graph 2). Going forward, the outlook 
for commodity prices will increasingly depend on 

growth in emerging market economies, given their 
weight in global growth. Price movements could 
also be affected by financial market developments 
and speculations.  
As for raw materials, 
metals
 prices have rebounded 
from end-2008 lows (especially copper), driven by 

restocking in China. Improved supplies resulting 
from favourable harvests have boosted global 
stocks of most 
agricultural
 commodities. This, 
along with weaker demand for internationally 
traded food commodities, has allowed prices to 
decline sharply from the mid-2008 heights.  
Graph 2: Oil price assumptions  
020
4060801001201400405060708091011
Spring 2009
Interim Sep. 09
Futures
USD /bl.
 Source: Ecowin and Commission services. 
 Financial markets have recovered substantially 
but challenges are still significant 
Over the past months, 
financial markets
 have 
returned to more normal conditions - the 
functioning of most market segments has steadily 

improved and investors have progressively returned 
to higher degrees of risk-taking. Increased 
confidence in the shock-absorbing capacity of the 

European banking system, along with signs that the 
fiscal stimulus packages and monetary initiatives 
are translating into a gr
adual economic recovery, 
have supported this normalisation. 
Supported by government actions and taking 
advantage of improved market conditions since the 
spring, banks have continued to strengthen their 

solvency ratios and to repair and cut leverage in 
their balance sheets, in an attempt to stabilise their 
financial position. They also seem to have been, at 
least partially, successful 
in restoring internal 
revenue generation, thanks in some measure to the 

extremely low short-term refinancing rates induced 
Interim forecast, September 2009      4 by the exceptional measures taken by monetary 
authorities. However, despite the recovery in equity 
markets, raising external funds remains 

challenging. Indeed, while liquidity-providing 
initiatives by central banks, in particular the ECB, 
have had a beneficial effect on the short end of the 

money market maturity spectrum, fund-raising at 
the longer end remains difficult for several banks. 
This reflects ongoing uncertainty about the size of 

the additional bank losses that will be booked in the 
coming quarters, amid the lagging effect of feeble 
economic conditions on loan portfolio quality. 
Deteriorating conditions in the corporate and 
household sector, reflected in rising numbers of 
corporate bankruptcies and higher unemployment 

rates, could further affect the credit quality of bank 
loan portfolios. So far, write-downs by financial 
companies have been concen
trated in asset-backed 
securities and derivatives holdings. However, if the 
economy does not recover soon, highly indebted 
households and non-financial corporations could 

face more severe challenges, further fuelling bank 
losses. Given the higher indebtedness of non-
financial corporations and households compared 

with previous downturns, recovery rates of bank 
loans could turn out to be comparatively low. In 
turn, this would adversely impact on the ability and 

willingness of banks to provi
de further fi
nancing to 
non-financial corporations and would incite lending 
institutions to tighten credit conditions even more, 

reinforcing the adverse feedback loops between the 
financial sector and the real economy.  
Bank lending to the private sector has continued to 
moderate, although the pace of tightening of credit 
standards has eased considerably in recent months, 
in particular towards non-financial corporations. 

The growth rate of loans to the euro-area private 
sector declined to 0.6% y-o-y in July (+1.6% for 
loans to non-financial corporations, 0.0% for loans 

to households), see Graph 3. The latest results from 
the ECB's Bank Lending 
Survey suggest that 
supply factors are losing
 importance in slowing 
down lending activity. The slowdown may thus be 
more due to demand factors, such as still-weak 
economic activity and the 
ongoing housing market 
correction.  Graph 3: Bank lending to households and to the 
non-financial corporate sector 
-20
246
8101214
160001020304050607080910Non-financial corporations
Households' house purchases
Households, total
y-o-y%
 Source: ECB. 
 Dramatic fall in EU GDP has come to an end 
The pace of contraction
 in overall economic activity
 slowed significantly in the 
second quarter of 2009. 
Following a cumulative decline of more than 4 pps. 
in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 

2009, GDP contracted by a mere 0.2% q-o-q in the 
EU (and 0.1% in the euro area) in the second 
quarter of this year. This
 outcome exceeded market 
expectations and was also 
significantly better than 
the Commission's spring projection (-0.7%). As 
such, it appears that the EU economy is no longer 

in free fall and has started to see the end of the 
recession. However, the year-on-year decline of 
almost 5% in the second quarter of 2009 illustrates 

the severity of the current downturn.  
The fall in GDP in the second half of 2008 was even 
worse than data available at the time of the 
Commission's spring forecast indicated (Graph 4), 

with a similar pattern for the euro area. Indeed, 
downward revisions to historical data alone (including 
revisions up to the September 7 cut-off date of this 
interim forecast) imply a reduction of about a quarter 
of a percentage point in the forecast for 2009 annual 

GDP growth made earlier this year. The stronger than 
expected contraction of activity in the first quarter was 
thereafter compensated for by a faster than projected 

stabilisation in the second quarter. 
Interim forecast, September 2009      5Graph 4: Quarter-on-quarter growth rates, EU  
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0

-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
08Q108Q208Q308Q409Q109Q209Q309Q4
EU - September interim profile
 EU - spring profile
q-o-q%
forecas
t Source: Commission services. 
The picture for economic
 activity in the second 
quarter was uneven across the largest EU Member 
States. While GDP growth surprised on the upside 
in Germany and France (+0.3% q-o-q), as well as in 

Poland (+0.5%), a somewhat
 larger than expected 
contraction was observed in Italy (-0.5%) and Spain 
(-0.9%). 
 Consumption has proved relatively resilient– 
Consumption
, both private and public, proved to be 
a stabilising factor during 
this recession. In the EU, 
household consumption contracted by around ¾%, 

significantly less than GDP, in both the last quarter 
of 2008 and the first of 2009 and broadly stabilised 
in the second quarter. The relative resilience of 

private consumption at a time when the saving rate 
is on the rise is largely explained by two factors, 
namely the strong disinflation process and support 

from nominal disposable income. HICP inflation 
has been on a downward path since August 2008, 
declining from 4.4% to just 0.2% in July 2009. The 

strength of disposable income growth can be 
explained by wage stickiness and lags in the 
response of employment to the slump in activity. 

The latter follows partly from policy measures such 
as the extension of short-term contracts (for more 
details see the labour market section below). 

Likewise, automatic stabilisers have played a role 
in sustaining private consumption, with 
discretionary measures, such as car scrapping 
schemes, offering additional support. 
Graph 5: Contributions to growth, EU 
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0

-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5

1.0
08Q108Q208Q308Q409Q109Q2
Inventories
Domestic demand
Net exports
GDP growth, q-o-q %
pps.
 Source: Commission services. 
 –while investment and trade flows have been 
heavily affected 
Gross fixed capital formation
 has been the main 
source of weakness during this recession. The level 
of gross fixed capital formation was some 14% 
lower in the second quarter of 2009 than in the first 
quarter of 2008, with 
the sectoral breakdown 
showing that the contraction was mostly due to 

non-construction investment. This implies that 
equipment investment has been driving the business 
cycle. The collapse in equipment investment 

follows from the strong decline in manufacturing 
production (down by nearly 20% since spring 2008) 
which, in turn, has led to a sharp fall in the capacity 

utilisation rate (to 70%, the lowest level since the 
DG ECFIN survey of the 
manufacturing industry 
started in 1990), see Graph 6. In addition, gross 

fixed capital formation has been held back by the 
ongoing housing-market corrections in several 
Member States which have weighed on 

construction investment. In contrast, stimulus 
measures, such as public infrastructure investment, 
have provided increasing support to economic 

activity in the course of the year.  
Turning to 
trade
, as evidenced by the 17% fall in 
exports of goods and services and the 16% fall in 
imports since the first quarter of 2008, Europe did 
not escape the downturn in
 world trade. The pace of 
the contraction in exports did, however, slow in the 

second quarter of 2009, whereas the slump in 
Interim forecast, September 2009      6 imports accelerated. As a result, net exports 
contributed positively again to growth in both the 
EU and the euro area. 
Graph 6: Industrial production and exports, euro area 
8085
9095100
105110Jan-08Apr-08Jul-08Oct-08Jan-09Apr-09
Exports
Industrial production 
Index, 2007=100
 Source: Commission services. 
 Inventory cycle advancing 
Following the collapse in global demand at the turn 
of year and the ensuing difficulties in accessing 
credit, firms embarked upon massive production 
cuts and stock depletion. In the first and second 
quarters of 2009 combined, 
inventories subtracted 
more than 1 pp. from GDP growth in the EU (and 

as much as 1.5 pps. in the euro area) - the largest 
negative inventory contribution since the inception 
of the GDP series. According to the EU 

manufacturing survey, companies still consider 
stock levels to be excessive. However, this 
indicator is now approaching its long-term average, 

signalling that considerable adjustment has taken 
place since December 2008.  
 Survey indicators point to an improved business 
climate 
Soft data
 have improved markedly in recent 
months. Based on past experience, the current 
levels of widely observed confidence indicators, 
such as the Commission's Economic Sentiment 

Indicator (ESI) and the Purchasing Managers' Index 
(PMI), are consistent with a stabilisation or, 
possibly, positive GDP growth in the second half of 
2009 (see Graph 7). This is in contrast to the 
negative figures presented in the spring forecast.  
Graph 7: GDP growth and Economic Sentiment 
Indicator, EU 
-5-4
-3-2-10
1
234
59900010203040506070809
60708090100
110
120
GDP growth (lhs)
Economic Sentiment (rhs)
indicator
y-o-y%
 Source: Commission services. 
An improvement is also 
evident when looking at 
the business-cycle tracer (see Graph 8). Having 
been deep in contraction territory for several 

months, the indicator starte
d to turn at the end of 
2008, entering into the upswing area this summer. 
Nevertheless, expansion territory still seems a long 
way off.  
Graph 8: Business cycle tracer, euro area 
-5-4-3-2-1012-0.6-0.300.3
downswingexpansion
upswin
gcontraction
Jan-00
Aug-09
level 
m-o-m change 
 Note: The business cycle indicator is made up from a weighted 
average of the five principle components from the survey series 
conducted in industry, services, building, retail trade and 
consumers. 
Source: Commission services. 
Interim forecast, September 2009      7Encouragingly, the recent 
improvement in the ESI 
has been broad-based among sectors and Member 
States (although the index remains below its 

historical average).  
The sub-indices of the PMI paint a similar picture. 
Moreover, the composite PMI has now surpassed 
the 50-point threshold that separates contraction 

from expansion levels. Likewise, consumer 
confidence has been improving since the spring in 
most Member States. 
 Short-term outlook boosted by temporary factors? 
As several of the 
growth supporting factors
 currently at play might prove to be short lived, the 

strength and sustainability of the expected recovery 
is yet to be confirmed.  
Sizeable policy interventions have succeeded in 
putting an end to the freefall of economic activity. 

An additional boost to GDP growth from public 
investment is likely in the second half of 2009. 
However, while automatic stabilisers have played 

an important role in dampening the adverse impact 
of the financial crisis, sizeable additional impulses 
from this source are unlikely in the quarters to 

come. Moreover, the termination of the scrappage 
schemes in several EU countries (including 
Germany, France and Italy) will weigh heavily on 

car registrations, and thus on private consumption, 
in the coming months. In addition, the 
unemployment rate is expected to rise further and 

the temporary absence of inflation is unlikely to be 
sufficient to push consumption towards a path of 
sustainable growth.  
High frequency data for the third quarter indicate 
that the inventory correction is moderating and may 
soon be over (see Graph 9). In August, the new-

orders-to-inventory ratio from the euro-area 
manufacturing PMI stood at its highest level since 
early 2007 (when the PMI was well above 50 and 

industrial output was still expanding). As a result, a 
positive contribution of inventories to GDP growth 
in the second half of 2009 can be expected. This 

effect may also prove temporary.  
Notwithstanding the positive nature of recent EU 
data, the road ahead remains rough given the heavy 
reliance of the current recovery on temporary 
factors, and the prevailing high level of uncertainty. 
GDP growth
 is forecast to rebound to 0.2% in the 
third quarter, but growth 
will recede slightly in the 
last quarter of 2009 as some temporary factors fade 
away. Graph 9: Stocks: growth contribution and 
assessment, EU 
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4

-0.2
00.2

0.4
Jul-08Oct-08Jan-09Apr-09Jul-09
05
101520
25Contribution of stocks to GDP (lhs)
DG ECFIN - Stocks of finished products - reversed (rhs)
q-o-q%level
Source: Commission services. 
Overall, the forecast for annual average GDP 
growth in 2009 in the euro area and the EU remains 
unchanged from the spring forecast. This, however, 

masks a substantial improvement in the growth 
momentum over the course of the year. The lower 
carry-over from last year due to the revisions of 

2008 data is balanced out by higher growth starting 
from the second quarter of this year. As a result of 
the stronger growth momentum, the expected 
decline in year-on-year GD
P growth in the fourth 
quarter of this year is substantially reduced relative 

to the spring forecast (see Table 1).  
Table 1: GDP growth forecast for 2009 
EUSpring forecastInterim forecast
Carry-over from 2008
-1.4-1.6
Y-o-Y in Q4-3.1-2.3

Annual average-4.0-4.0
euro areaSpring forecastInterim forecast
Carry-over from 2008
-1.4-1.6
Y-o-Y in Q4-3.1-2.3
Annual average-4.0-4.0
Decomposition of the GDP growth forecast for 2009
 Source: Commission services. 
Interim forecast, September 2009      8 Looking beyond the forecast horizon  
The upward revision of growth prospects for the 
second half of this year implies a positive risk for 
the 2010 forecast of about half a percentage point 

compared with the spring fo
recast (due to a higher 
carry-over at the end of 2009). In addition, the 
stabilisation in key financial markets and 

encouraging hard and soft data in recent months 
offer support for the period beyond 2009, i.e. 
beyond the horizon of this interim forecast. 

However, several of the te
mporary factors that are 
set to boost growth in the short term are likely to 
diminish over time. A lasting and sustainable 
recovery might need more time to materialise. 
 Low inflation supports private consumption 
Consumer-price
 inflation
 continued to decline 
substantially in the course of 2009 - reaching a 

trough of -0.7% in July in
 the euro area and 0.2% in 
the EU - and providing 
noticeable support to 
household real disposable income. The decline in 

the headline inflation rate has been driven mostly 
by energy and food prices, although inflation has 
subsided across all product
s and services as the 
macroeconomic environment has weakened. 
Regarding the measures of underlying inflation, 
HICP inflation excluding energy and unprocessed 
food (core inflation) decreased from over 2% in the 

euro area at the end of last
 year to 1.2% in July 
2009, mainly as a result of
 an easing in services' 
prices and, to a lesser extent, a moderation in 
processed food prices. 
The effect of the sharp 
weakening in activity is 
particularly visible in 
producer-price inflation
. It fell in the euro area from
 9.1% to -8.5% between 
July 2008 and July 2009, on the back of 
decelerating prices for 
energy and food input 
products and base effects. However, the speed of 
the decline in industrial price inflation and its main 
components seems to have slowed in the last few 

months, suggesting an easing of downward 
pressures.  
Turning to 
wage indicators
 in the euro area, the 
annual growth rate of hourly labour costs remained 

relatively high at 3.7% in the first quarter of 2009 
(down from 4.0% in the fourth quarter of last year). 
On the other hand, reflecting shorter working hours, 
the growth of nominal compensation per employee 
slowed significantly, from 3.1% in 2008 to 1.8% in 

the first quarter of 2009. However, combined with a 
sizeable decline in labour
 productivity, unit labour 
costs rose markedly. At 5.6% in the first quarter of 

2009, the growth in unit labour costs was the 
highest in almost six years.  Graph 10: Headline and underlying inflation, euro 
area  -1012
345070809
y-o-y%
HICP
HICP excl. energy and unprocessed food
HICP excl. energy
HICP excl. energy and all food
 Source: Commission services. 
Looking ahead, given that la
bour markets react with 
a lag to economic activity and capacity utilisation is 
at a record-low level, a moderation of inflationary 
pressures from labour markets appears likely. 
Graph 11: Inflation expectations, euro area  
0.0
0.5

1.0
1.5
2.0

2.5
06070809
y-o-y%
-50
-40
-30
-20

-10

01020
304050balance
Index linked - implied inflation expectations, 10 Year (lhs)
Consumer inflation expectations (rhs)
 Source: Ecowin and Commission services. 
Interim forecast, September 2009      9Consumers' and producers' inflationary 
expectations also continued to ease in August, in 
response to the subdued economic outlook and the 

continued drops in actual inflation.  
Based on an update of the inflation outlook for the 
seven largest Member States, the 
outlook for 
inflation
 in 2009 has been left unchanged at the 
aggregated level. Relatively moderate revisions 
across countries, except Ge
rmany, have offset each 
other. Thus HICP inflation is expected to average 

0.4% in the euro area and 0.9% in the EU this year.  
The stability of the inflation annual average, 
however, masks some significant shifts in the 

quarterly profiles across countries, due to the 
sometimes surprising ou
tcomes in the second 
quarter. The pass-through from currency 

depreciation was stronger 
than expected in Poland 
and the UK, oil prices in Italy and the Netherlands 
were higher than anticipated, while services 

inflation decelerated faster 
than expected in Spain. 
Nonetheless, inflation is still expected to reach a 
trough of 0.3% in the EU and -0.3% in the euro 

area in the third quarte
r of 2009, and increase 
gradually thereafter. 
The projected profile for inflation is shaped by two 
factors. On the one hand, the assumed softening of 

inflationary pressures on all HICP components, due 
to the weakening macro
economic environment and 
the expected deceleration in
 unit labour costs, is 
likely to continue to depress underlying inflation. 
This is consistent with substantial slack in the 
economy, as reflected by the large output gap. On 
the other hand, the large 
energy and food-related 
base effects of last year are set to reverse this 

autumn, thus adding to the headline inflation rate 
towards the end of 2009. Commodity prices also 
pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook. 
 Impact on labour market and public finances 
partly ahead 
The labour market
 situation deteriorated further this 
year. Employment in both the euro area and the EU 
fell by 0.9% in the first quarter, exceeding the 

quarterly declines recorded in the second half of 
2008. In July, the unemployment rate stood at 9.5% 
in the euro area and 9.0% in the EU, more than 2 
pps. above the lows of early 2008.  
However, the pace of the deterioration in labour 
market conditions appears to have moderated 

somewhat since late sp
ring. For instance, the 
average monthly change in the unemployment rate 
between May and July was 0.1 pp., compared with 

0.3 pp. for the first four months of the year. This 
easing reflects in particular the short-term policy 
measures put in place to support employment. 
Nonetheless, the labour market situation is expected 
to deteriorate further in the second half of 2009. 
This is in line with the usual lag of around 2-3 

quarters between cycli
cal developments in 
economic activity and the la
bour market. Moreover, 
despite an improvement in firms' employment 

expectations in recent months, survey data is still 
pointing to job reductions going forward. Likewise, 
while the positive impact of the various labour 

market policies implemented in response to the 
recession is set to continue, the effects of some may 
weaken in the latter part of the year. Specifically, if 

the economic outlook does not improve rapidly, 
firms in countries where publicly supported short-
term working schemes are in place (such as 

Germany whose short-term work programme 
covered around 1.4 million people at the end of 
June, compared to 270,
000 at end-2008), may 
reduce the use of such schemes and increase 
layoffs.  
Public finances
 in 2009 are expected to be strongly 
affected by the downturn
, due to the working of 
automatic stabilisers (e.g. shrinking tax bases and 
rising social expenditure), but also because of the 

discretionary fiscal stimulus measures taken by 
many EU governments with the aim of stabilising 
the economy within the framework of the Recovery 

Plan. While the interim forecast does not reassess 
the budgetary outlook fo
r EU Member States, 
preliminary information suggests that government 

deficits in the EU and the euro area in 2009 could 
be even higher than expected at the time of the 
spring forecast. This appears to be mainly caused 

by stronger-than-expected 
revenue shortfalls in a 
number of countries, as output growth and the size 
of discretionary stimulus measures are broadly in 

line with the spring forecast.  
Interim forecast, September 2009      10 A full assessment of the prospects for employment 
and public finances will be carried out in the 
Commission services' upcoming autumn forecast. 
 Continuing uncertainty but risks more balanced  
At the current juncture, risks to the EU 
growth 
outlook 
for 2009 appear broadly balanced. While 
data for the early part of the year confirmed the 
materialisation of some of the downside risks 

identified in the spring forecast it is, above all, 
surprises on the upside th
at have characterised the 
situation as of late. The 
positive nature of recent 
data points to a pick-up in economic activity, albeit 
modest, in the second half of 2009. However, the 

sustainability of any recovery is far from clear and 
uncertainty remains high. 
Beginning with the 
downside risks
 to the outlook, 
the possible intensification of the negative feedback 

loop between the real economy and the still 
relatively fragile financial sector remains a key 
concern. In addition, headwinds on the domestic 

front - such as deteriorating labour-market 
conditions (unemployment has yet to peak), 
ongoing housing-market corrections in several 

Member States, spare capacity and the ending of 
some stimulus measures - could weigh on domestic 
demand more than envisaged at present, posing a 

second downside risk. At the same time, the relative 
strength of the euro may restrain export growth 
somewhat. In terms of th
e external environment, 
rising oil and other commodity prices could 
mitigate the global recovery
, as could an increase in 
protectionist pressures (following a further increase 
in unemployment) or a loss
 of confidence due to 
e.g. uncertainty abou
t the composition and 
robustness of the rebound and the nature of exit 
strategies. On the 
upside
, policy measures in the EU (and 
abroad) may prove more e
ffective than assumed to 
date in restoring the financial sector to health, and 
in supporting economic activity. Similarly, the 
imminent turning of the inventory cycle could have 

a greater impact on domes
tic demand than currently 
anticipated, as could further improvements in 
business sentiment. Moreover, to the extent that 

policies aimed at the labour market have a better 
than expected outcome, consumer confidence and 
spending might also be stronger. Finally, a more 
pronounced upturn in global demand poses an 
upside risk for export growth.  
Graph 12 quantifies these various risks in terms of 
the possible deviation of output growth from the 
updated central forecast. It shows the impact that 
different combinations of risks could have on euro-

area GDP growth, the outcom
es being weighted by 
the probability of their occurrence. At a 90% 
confidence interval and with data for the first half 

of the year already availa
ble, GDP growth in the 
euro area in 2009 could be about 1 pp. lower than 
the central scenario if all negative factors were to 
materialise, but could also be up to 1 pp. higher if 
the positive risks to the outlook were to come 

about.  Graph 12: Risks to the growth outlook, euro 
area-6-5-4-3-2
-10123406070809
%lower 90%
lower 70%
lower 40%
upper 40%
upper 70%
upper 90%
central forecast
actual
 Source: Commission services. 
Turning to the 
inflation outlook
, risks also appear to 
be broadly balanced fo
r 2009. While the recent 
pick-up in commodity prices and improving 
economic conditions represent upside risks further 

out, excess capacity (as reflected by the large 
output gap), is likely to continue exerting 
downward pressure on infl
ation in the near future. 
As regards the risk of a deflation scenario, i.e. a 
persistent decline in a very broad set of prices, 
propagated by a self-rei
nforcing expectation of 
further price declines, the 
spring forecast noted that 
this 'appeared limited at the current juncture, at 
least at the aggregate level'. Given the present 

rebound in oil and other commodity prices, and 
Interim forecast, September 2009      11with base effects set to reverse shortly, this risk 
seems to have subsided further thereafter. 
Overall, it would appear that, amid continuing 
sizeable uncertainty, risks 
to the EU gr
owth outlook for 2009 are broadly balanced. Likewise, risks to 
the inflation outlook appear largely balanced at this 
time.  
Looking towards the
 medium-term horizon, 
it remains to be seen whether the current rebound will 
translate into a sustained r
ecovery once the effect of 
stimulus measures fade, and the full implications of 
the crisis for labour markets, public finances and 
potential growth rates come to the fore. A full 

assessment of these risks will be carried out in the 
upcoming autumn forecast. 
 Interim forecast, September 2009      12 Growth and inflation prospects in the 
seven largest Member States 
1. Germany Œ private consumption stabilises the 
economy Dragged down by a massive slump in exports and 
investment, real GDP in 
Germany contracted by 
3.5% q-o-q in the first quarter, slightly worse than 

projected in the spring forecast. However, on the 
back of robust private and public consumption, the 
economy staged a faster-tha
n-expected recovery in 
the second quarter, growing by around ¼% q-o-q. 
Private consumption was aided by very low 

inflation, the legacy of relatively high wage growth 
in 2008 and the fact that unemployment has 
remained well contained so far, mainly thanks to 

the increased use of shor
t-time work. Moreover, 
relief measures included in
 the fiscal stimulus 
packages and higher soci
al transfers limited the 
impact of the crisis on disposable incomes, while 
the car scrappage premium offered additional 
incentives to advance car purchases. The rebound in 

the second quarter was further supported by a 
gradual recovery of exports and a certain 
stabilisation of investment demand. 
Most leading indicators point to the recovery taking 
further hold in the second half of the year. 
Economic sentiment, business climate and 
consumer confidence indicators have improved 

noticeably in recent months. Industrial orders, 
including export orders, have recovered from 
record-low levels and industrial production started 
growing again in May, having fallen almost 
uninterruptedly for eight months in a row. 
In line with these improvin
g leading indicators, real 
GDP growth is set to ga
ther pace in the third 
quarter. This is due to a number of factors. First, 
judging from monthly data, the economic recovery 

in the second quarter only took off in May and 
June. This implies a large positive carry-over into 
the third quarter, which increases the quarterly 

growth rate for purely st
atistical reasons. Second, 
the public infrastructure projects adopted as part of 
the German stimulus package started being 

implemented mainly from the third quarter, 
providing an additional boost to growth. Third, the 
inventory cycle has turned with massive de-

stocking already taking place in the second quarter. 
Consequently, positive growth contributions can be 
expected in the third quarter (and beyond) as 
companies gradually start to replenish their 

inventories. Finally, private consumption will again 
be supported by still relatively low unemployment 
as well as pension hikes taking effect in July. 
While the recovery is expected to continue in the 
fourth quarter, it is, however, set to lose some 
momentum. The anticipated increase in 
unemployment and higher inflation in the second 

half of the year will incr
easingly weigh on private 
consumption. Furthermore, the de facto expiry of 
the car scrappage scheme in September is likely to 
trigger some backlash, leading to a short-fall in 
demand later in the year. Also, statistical factors 

will no longer provide an additional boost to growth 
rates as they do in the third quarter. Real GDP 
growth is therefore projected to decelerate from 

¾% in the third quarter to 0.1% in the fourth 
quarter.  
Graph 13: Germany Œ economic sentiment and 
GDP growth 
7075808590
95100105110
1150001020304050607080910
level
-8-6-4-20246Economic Sentiment Indicator, sa (lhs)
GDP growth (rhs)
  forecast
y-o-y%
 Source: Commission services. 
Thanks to favourable base
 effects associated with 
lower oil and energy prices
, annual HICP inflation 
has steadily decelerated si
nce the start of 2009 and 
turned briefly negative in July. Inflation is expected 
to pick up moderately until the end of the year, as 

these base effects gradually peter out, and to reach 
around 0.3% on average for the year. 
Interim forecast, September 2009      132. Spain Œ slower pace of adjustment due to 
structural imbalances 
Economic activity in 2009 is forecast to decline by 
around 3¾%, reflecting the structural correction of 

internal and external imbalances accumulated over 
the last ten years, together with the impact of the 
financial crisis.  
The deeper GDP contraction projected for 2009, 
which represents a downward revision of ½ pp. 
compared with the spring 
forecast, stems from the 
materialisation of some of the identified downside 
risks. Specifically, the st
rong acceleration of job 
destruction in the first half of 2009 has accentuated 

the fall in private consumption. In addition, the 
latest revision of the national accounts has revealed 
a more negative contribution from domestic 

demand in 2008, as well as in the first half of 2009, 
driven by a sharper fall in gross fixed capital 
formation and a more negative behaviour in private 

consumption. However, the lower cost of credit, the 
recent improvements in the consumer confidence 
indicator, and positive developments in the number 

of registered workers in July and August suggest a 
slower fall in the coming quarters. For investment, 
the on-going adjustment in the housing sector is 

projected to continue at a similar pace. 
Nevertheless, less tight credit conditions and the 
easing observed in the deterioration of the 

economic situation, whic
h could lead to an 
improvement in profit expectations, should favour 
the realisation of some of
 the corporate investment 
plans that were initially delayed. As a result, the fall 
in investment in equipment is set to be less 

pronounced in the second half of the year. Overall, 
domestic demand is projected to reduce GDP 
growth in 2009 by more than 6.5 pps.  
In the external sector, the revision of the national 
accounts has also revealed a more positive 
contribution of net external demand in 2008 and in 
the first half of 2009, mainly driven by a significant 

contraction in imports of goods and services. 
However, the fall in imports might be less marked 
in the coming quarters, more in line with 

developments in domestic demand. Exports growth 
turned positive in the second quarter of 2009, 
consistent with the incipient recovery of world 

demand. All in all, the growth contribution of net 
exports is expected to incr
ease to 2.9 pps. compared 
to 1.4 pps. in 2008.  
Graph 14: Spain Œ employment and GDP growth
 -5-4-3-2
-1012308Q108Q208Q308Q409Q109Q209Q309Q4
y-o-y%
-8-7-6-5
-4
-3-2-1
0
123y-o-y%
GDP growth (lhs)
Employment (QNA) (rhs)
Registered workers for Social Security, 09Q3=Jul,Aug (rhs)
forecast
 Source: INE and Social Security Institute. 
Prices are expected to stagnate in 2009. Although 
inflation fell to -0.7% in the second quarter of the year 

and might still fall slightly further in the third quarter, 
it should return to positive territory in the fourth 
quarter, around ¼ pp. above the average in the euro 
area, mirroring the projected increase in oil prices. The 
recent slowdown in unit labour cost in the first half of 

2009 merely reflects large productivity increases 
resulting from the significant number of lay-offs 
recorded in the construction sector. 
 3. France Œ back in positive territory from the 
second quarter 
GDP surprisingly started to expand again and grew 
by 0.3% in the second quarter of 2009 after having 

contracted sharply by 1.4% in the last quarter of 
2008 and 1.3% in the first of 2009. Growth was 
mainly supported by a surge in exports, thanks most 

notably to the good performance of the automotive 
industry. Thus, the contribution of net trade to GDP 
growth came out significantly positive (0.9 pp.) after 

having been a drag for the four previous quarters. 
Private consumption maintained a relative resilience 
and posted positive growth despite the ongoing 

marked deterioration of the labour market. Fixed 
investment continued to adjust to the downturn, but 
at a slower pace (-1.0% q-o-
q after -2.6% in the first 
quarter). Inventories were the main hindrance to 
economic activity; after having subtracted 0.7 pp. 
Interim forecast, September 2009      14 from GDP in the first quart
er, they shaved off an 
additional 0.6 pp. in the second quarter. 
Graph 15: France Œ GDP and private consumption  
-4-3
-2
-10123
4
5
69900010203040506070809
y-o-y%
GDP growth
Private consumption
 Source: Ecowin. 
In the second half of 2009, activity is expected to 
continue to expand moderately, with quarterly 

growth of 0.4% and 0.3% in the third and fourth 
quarters respectively. Indicators point to a recovery 
in production: the manufacturing Purchasing 
Managers™ Index (PMI) rose above 50 in August for 
the first time since mid-2008 and the services PMI 

is recovering rapidly as well. With inventories back 
at normal levels, stock building could have a 
positive impact on growth in the second semester of 

2009 for the first time since the first half of 2008. In 
an improved international context, exports are set to 
keep on rising. Privat
e consumption, which 
continues to be supported by the various stimulus 
measures in favour of households, is expected to 
remain positive but weak, in view of the rapidly 

worsening labour market: unemployment reached 
9.8% in July and might even cross the two-digit 
barrier in 2009. In addition, consumer confidence is 

slowly recovering, but from a low level. The end of 
the decline in consumer pric
es is also expected to 
weigh on household consumption from the fourth 

quarter onwards. As for inve
stments, they are likely 
to suffer in the short term from low capacity 
utilisation rates, as well as from a lacklustre 

housing market. However, the stimulus package 
will kick in, mainly from the third quarter, and 
public investment is expected to provide a 
significant relief to activity notably in the 
construction sector. 
Over the entire year, GDP 
is forecast to grow by 
-2.1%, compared with 
-3% in the Commission 
services™ spring 2009 forecast.
  The year-on-year HICP inflation rate, which 

continued to fall in July, to -0.8% from -0.6% in 
June, is expected to bottom out in the third quarter 
and to become positive in the fourth. The main 

reason for these developments is the base effects 
associated to last year™s sharp price increases 
caused by food and energy inflation, in a context of 

clearly positive underlying inflation.  
 4. Italy Œ gradual improvement after a deep 
recession The slump in global demand and confidence linked 
to the financial crisis has hit hard the Italian 
economy. Having already been on a recessionary 

path since the second qu
arter of 2008, real GDP 
contracted sharply over the final quarter of 2008 
and the first quarter of 2009 (-2.1% and -2.7% 

q-o-q respectively). It is reported to have contracted 
again in the second quarter
 of 2009, although more 
moderately (-0.5% q-o-q). These outcomes were 

worse than those projected in the Commission 
services' spring 2009 forecast. 
In recent months, confidence in both services and 
manufacturing rebounded significantly from the 
trough reached in Febr
uary/March 2009, even 
though the level remains relatively subdued. 

Industrial production is expected to recover 
somewhat in the third quarter of 2009, after 
contracting by around 25% 
since the peak recorded 
at the beginning of 2008. Real GDP is thus 
projected to grow moderately in both the third and 

the fourth quarters of 2009. For the year as a whole, 
economic activity is projected to shrink by 5%, the 
strongest annual fall in several decades. Final consumption is expected to be the main driver 
of the very mild expansion in the final quarters of 
2009, as anticipated by the recent rebound in 

consumer confidence. The factors behind this 
improvement are likely to be lower inflation and the 
government recovery schemes providing relief to 

most vulnerable households and sustaining 
purchases of durable goods. At the same time, tax 
incentives recently put in
 place by the government 
Interim forecast, September 2009      15will help to limit the contraction in investment in 
the remainder of the year.  
Graph 16: Italy Œ GDP growth 
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
07Q107Q308Q108Q309Q109Q3
q-o-q%
Spring 2009
Interim September 2009
forecas
t Source: Commission services. 
Exports are assumed to benefit from the nascent 
recovery in global demand, in particular in Italy's 
main trading partners of 
the euro area. Imports are 
expected to return to modest growth, driven by 
domestic demand for durable goods. Overall, the 
contribution of net exports to real GDP growth in 

the second half of the y
ear is anticipated to be 
broadly neutral. Finally, following the recovery in 
activity, a re-stocking of inventories above the 

current low levels is also expected to support 
demand in the second half of 2009. 
The expected weak recovery in the second half of 
2009 implies a small positive growth impulse into 
2010. 
HICP inflation is expected to decline to an 
historical low in the third quarter of 2009 given the 
still positive base effect for energy prices. Under 
the assumption of a moderate increase in oil prices, 

inflation is set to pick up in the fourth quarter. 
Overall, annual HICP in
flation is expected to 
average 0.9% in 2009.  
 5. The Netherlands Œ end of recession this year? 
In the first half of 2009, economic activity 
experienced a severe contraction. After a sharp q-o-

q drop of GDP by 2.7% in the first quarter, there 
was another decline of 0.9% in the second quarter, 
the fifth in a row. Exports 
contracted rapidly in the 
first half of 2009, reflecting the sensitivity of the 
Dutch economy to world trade. However, as 
imports also decreased sharply, the contribution of 

net exports to the negative growth (1.1%) remained 
relatively limited in the first half of 2009 compared 
to the 2.5% negative contribution of domestic 

demand. Most striking was the fall in private 
consumption, which decreased by 1.8% and 0.6% 
q-o-q in the first two quarte
rs respectively, despite a 
rise in real disposable income. This was probably 
due to significant confid
ence and wealth effects. 
GDP growth is expected to escape negative 
territory at the end of this year, with flat growth in 
the fourth quarter, wher
eas the preceding third 
quarter should still show a decline in economic 

activity of 0.4%. Private consumption growth is 
expected to remain subdued 
for the rest of the year, 
as consumer confidence, a
lthough on an increasing 
trend in the past months, continues to be negative 
and will therefore most likely put downward 
pressure on spending. Also, households have 

experienced important wealth losses over the past 
year, mainly through a fall in the stock markets and 
decreasing pension fund assets. These wealth losses 

are foreseen to have a prolonged upward effect on 
the households' saving rate. Finally, unemployment 
might increase, having a negative impact on real 

disposable income. Government expenditure and 
the stimulus package are expected to have a 
positive effect on economic growth. As for 

investment, the negative growth of the first half of 
2009 is likely to be continued in view of still weak 
demand and a very low capacity utilisation rate, as 
well as difficult credit conditions. GDP growth is 
projected to benefit also from a positive 

contribution from net exports, as it is expected that 
exports stabilise in the remainder of 2009 and 
imports decrease due to falling domestic demand.  
After having been very tight for several years, the 
labour market has been loosening this year, 
reflected by the sharp fall in the vacancy rate. 
Although the unemployment rate is still at a very 

low level and until now rising at a rather modest 
pace it is expected that it will increase rapidly.  
The year-on-year HICP infl
ation rate should bottom 
out in Q3. Its drop is mainly the result of the lower 

energy prices, in particular gas and electricity. 
Interim forecast, September 2009      16 Overall for 2009, inflation is expected to come out 
at 1.1%.  
Graph 17: The Netherlands Œ GDP growth and 
inflation 
-3-2-101
2308Q108Q208Q308Q409Q109Q209Q309Q4
GDP growth, q-o-q%
HICP, y-o-y% 
forecas
t% Source: Commission services. 
 6. Poland Œ strong resilience in a difficult 
environment Economic activity continued to be strong in the 
second quarter of 2009 reaching ½% q-o-q. The 
positive growth surprise was due to a highly 
positive contribution of net exports, driven by the 

collapse of imports as the 
sustained depreciation of 
the Polish currency undermined their price-
competitiveness to the benefit of domestic 

production. However, domestic demand fell on the 
back of a significant drop in inventories and 
shrinking investments, while private consumption 

continued growing, fuelled by personal income tax 
cuts, indexation of pensions, the relatively resilient 
labour market and still positive credit growth to 

households.  
For 2009 as a whole, GDP 
is expected to grow by 
1%, Poland being probably the only country in the 
EU to post positive growth. This follows from the 
better-than-expected result in the first half of 2009.  
GDP quarter-on-quarter growth is expected to 
stabilise during the remainder of the year. Domestic 

demand will continue to fall, with a decreasingly 
positive contribution of consumption and negative 
contribution of investments. Improving external 

demand and imminent restocking will, however, 
support the Polish economy in the second half of 
the year. Graph 18: Poland Œ employment and GDP growth 
-3-2-10123
456708Q108Q309Q109Q3
GDP growth
Employment (LFS)
Employment in the enterprise sector, 09Q3=July
y-o-y% 
forecas
tSource: Polish statistical office and Commission services. 
Consumption growth will decline as the situation in 
the labour market is set to 
deteriorate on the back of 
increasing unemployment and sluggish growth in 
nominal wages. The unemployment rate is expected 
to grow, after a temporary improvement during the 

summer, as the effects of
 the recent lay-offs and 
restructuring in the ente
rprise sector become 
visible. Investment levels
 are expected to weaken 
further on account of uncertain business 
environment and sluggish FDI inflows, despite 
relatively sound profit situation of the corporate 
sector in the first half of the year and increased 
infrastructure spending.  
The appreciation of the currency in recent months is 
expected to improve the price-competitiveness of 
imports towards the end of the year and into 2010, 
while rebounding external demand is set to improve 

the outlook for exports. All in all, the contribution 
of net exports should remain positive, albeit in a 
declining trend.  
HICP inflation in the second quarter of 2009 
reached 4¼% year-on-year on
 the back of exchange 
rate developments, almost a full percentage point 
higher than in the spring 2009 Commission 

services' forecast. The effects of the depreciation 
during the turn of 2008 / early 2009 will still be felt 
throughout 2009, though should be progressively 

mitigated by the deteriorating domestic demand. 
Interim forecast, September 2009      17All in all, inflation for 2009 has been revised 
upwards compared to the spring forecast, from 
2.6% to 3¾%.  
 7. The United Kingdom Œ return to positive 
territory before year-end 
Following declines in UK output in the second half 
of 2008, the pace of GD
P contraction increased 
further in the first quart
er of 2009 to reach a 
quarterly rate of -2.4%. 
The second quarter saw a 
smaller reduction in output of 0.7% (q-o-q), 
marking it as a probable inflection point in the 
recession. Growth in both quarters was dominated 

by domestic demand falls, led by large reductions 
in fixed investment as credit conditions remained 
restrictive, spare capacity rose and new industrial 

orders fell. Private consumption contracted by 1¼% 
and 1% respectively in the corresponding quarters, 
exerting a negative drag on growth and continuing 

the falls in household spending that set in during 
the second quarter of 2008. Government 
expenditure grew moderately throughout the first 

half of 2009, but gave only a minor impetus to 
growth. Inventories were reduced in the first and 
second quarters by the largest amounts on record, 

although a smaller fall in the second implied a 
minor GDP stimulus for the quarter. Imports and 
exports contracted sharply 
over the same period as 
domestic demand in the UK and its main trade 
partners fell. Imports shrank somewhat more 
sharply, thus improving net exports, which 
supported growth by 0.1 pp. and 0.2 pp. 
respectively. The labour market weakened 

considerably, with the unemployment rate rising 
from 6.3% in Q4 2008 to 7.8% in Q2 and the 
employment rate declining by 2 p.p. on the year to 

72.7% in the second quar
ter. The Bank of England 
maintained its accommodativ
e stance, leaving Bank 
Rate at 0.5% since its last change in March, when it 

commenced a programme 
of asset purchases 
currently expected to to
tal £175bn (~12.5% GDP).  
GDP in the third and fourth quarters of the year is 
expected to return to slight positive growth as both 

industrial and services output recover from the lows 
of the second quarter. Domestic demand will 
continue to prove lacklustre, however, with 

continued falls in fixed investment likely. In view 
of a projected further weakening of the labour 
market, a return to minimal positive growth in 
private consumption is likely to occur only in the 
final quarter, partly supported by the announced 

reversal of the 2.5 p.p. reduction in VAT at the 
beginning of 2010. Slower falls in inventories are 
likely to temporarily exert upward pressure on 

growth in the remaining quarters, with inventories 
stabilising at the turn of the year. Government 
consumption will be buoyed in the second half if 

Budget spending targets are adhered to, while net 
foreign demand will provide a minor lift to activity, 
supported by a gradual stabilisation of exports and 
further falls in imports. 
Overall, GDP growth for th
e entire year is forecast 
to reach -4.3%, which constitutes a downward 

revision of ½ p.p. from the Commission services' 
spring 2009 forecast. 
The year-on-year HICP inflation rate in July 
remained unchanged from the previous month at 

1.8%, only slightly below the Bank of England's 
target. Inflation is expected to fall throughout the 
rest of the year on account of easing capacity 

pressures and continued demand weakness, as 
indicated by negative producer price inflation rates. 
Base effects from the previo
us year are also likely 
to depress inflation rates. Average HICP inflation in 
2009 is expected to be 1.9%, with the upward 
revision from spring being primarily due to the 

larger-than-expected pass-through of sterling's 
depreciation.  Graph 19: The United Kingdom Œcontributions to 
quarterly GDP growth and inflation 
-3-2
-10
1
2
308Q308Q409Q109Q209Q309Q4
pps.
-6-4
-2
0
2
4
6y-o-y%
Net exports
Inventories
Dom. demand (excl. invent.)
GDP growth, q-o-q%
HICP (rhs)
forecas
t Source: Commission services. 
Interim forecast, September 2009      18  Table 2: Real GDP growth 
2009/12009/22009/32009/4
Spring forecast 
May 2009Interim forecast 
Sep. 2009Germany
-3.50.30.70.1
-5.4-5.1
Spain 
-1.6-1.1-0.4-0.2
-3.2-3.7
France-1.30.30.40.3
-3.0-2.1
Italy
-2.7-0.50.20.1
-4.4-5.0
Netherlands
-2.7-0.9-0.40.0
-3.5-4.5
Euro area-2.5-0.10.20.1
-4.0-4.0Poland
0.30.50.10.0
-1.41.0United Kingdom
-2.4-0.70.20.5
-3.8-4.3
EU27-2.4-0.20.20.1
-4.0-4.0Annual GDP forecast
(%, year-on-year)
2009
Quarterly GDP forecast              
(%, quarter-on-quarter)
2009 Source: Commission services. 
 Table 3: Consumer price inflation 
2009/12009/22009/32009/4
Spring forecast 
May 2009Interim forecast 
Sept. 2009
Germany
0.80.2-0.20.6
0.30.3Spain 
0.5-0.7-0.80.9
-0.10.0France0.7-0.2-0.60.2
0.20.0Italy
1.40.90.11.1
0.80.9Netherlands
1.81.6-0.11.2
1.41.1Euro area
1.00.2-0.30.7
0.40.4Poland
3.64.34.23.3
2.63.8United Kingdom
3.02.11.31.1
1.01.9EU271.60.90.30.9
0.90.92009
Quarterly HICP forecast             
(%, year-on-year)
Annual HICP forecast
(%, year-on-year)
2009 Source: Commission services. 
Interim forecast, September 2009      19Box: Technical background to the interim forecast 
 Technical background 
In February 2006, the Commission presented the first of 
what are now twice-yearly interim forecasts with the 
objective of updating its comprehensive spring and 
autumn economic forecasts (w
ith the next fully-fledged 
forecast scheduled for 3 November 2009). This interim 
forecast updates the outlook of the spring 2009 economic 
forecast of 4 May 2009. The cut-off date for this interim 
forecast to take new information on board was 7 
September 2009. 
The interim forecast updates the outlook for seven 
Member States i.e. Germany, Spain, France, Italy, the 
Netherlands, Poland and the United Kingdom (which are 
the largest in the EU based on an average of the ranking 
in terms of both population and nominal GDP) as regards 
real GDP growth and HICP inflation for the current year. 
These updates are prepared
 using indicator-based 
forecasting models or judgemental forecasting 
techniques.  
Estimates for the European Union and the euro area are 
prepared using the nominal GDP-weighted updates for 
the largest Member States. 
These countries account for 
80% of the European Union and almost 85% of the euro 
area in terms of nominal GDP. The outlook for the 
smaller Member States has not been updated. The 
Commission has made projections for the euro area and 
the EU using the updates for the five and seven largest 
Member States respectively, and assuming that the 
revision for quarter-on-quarter growth rates for the 
smaller Member States is equal to that of the larger ones. 
Quarterly data are updated with the latest available 
information. When comparing quarterly with annual GDP 

growth it must be kept in mind that, whenever possible, 
quarterly data are adjusted for both seasonal influences 
and the number of working days while annual data is 
presented in unadjusted form. Calendar factors are, 
however, relatively small in 2009. 
    
   External conditions  
This forecast is based on a 
set of external assumptions. 
These assumptions are based 
on market expectations at 
the time of the forecast. To shield the assumptions from 
possible volatility during one
 specific trading day, 
averages from a 10-day reference period have been used 
for all technical assumptions.  
The technical assumption as regards exchange rates has 
been standardised using fixed nominal exchange rates for 
all currencies. They are kept constant based on the 
averages from 10 days up to 
4 September, implying e.g. 
an annual average of USD/EUR of 1.38.  
Interest rates assumptions ar
e, since spring 2007, market-
based instead of expert-based. These assumptions should 
be interpreted with caution, as market-based assumptions 
do not only reflect policy rate
 expectations, but also 
liquidity conditions in this 
period of market uncertainty. 
Short-term interest rates for the euro area are derived 
from future contracts. Long-te
rm interest rates for the 
euro area, as well as short- and long-term interest rates 
for Poland and the UK are calculated using implicit 
forward swap rates, corrected for the spread between the 
3-month interbank interest 
rate and the 3-month swap-
rate. As a result, the short-term rate is at 1.3% and the 
long-term interest rates at 3.3% in 2009 for the euro area. 
The outlook for oil prices is based on futures prices. The 
price for a barrel of Brent crude
 oil is projected at 61.9 
USD/barrel in 2009 (corresponding to 45.4 EUR/barrel). 
This would be 17.1 USD/barrel (or 12.8 EUR/barrel) 
higher than assumed in the spring 2009 forecast, 
reflecting an improved 
global outlook and demand expectations from e.g. 
emerging markets.  
Global demand in 2009 is revised upwards, following the 
recent improved indicator for the US and particularly 
Asia. Global GDP growth excluding the EU is now 
forecast to slow to 0.2% only in 2009 (down from 3.8% 
in 2008), nearly 1 pp. higher than expected in the spring 
forecast (-0.7%). World trade is also set to fall sharply in 
2009, with growth in export and import volumes 
(excluding the EU) estimated at below -12%. 
  