Economic Bulletin Issue 2 / 2016
2Contents  
Economic and monetary developmentsOverview 31 External environment 72 Financial developments 133 Economic activity 164 Prices and costs 215 Money and credit 256 Fiscal developments 30  Boxes1  The slowdown in US labour productivity growth Œ stylised facts  
and economic implications 342  Current oil price trends 383  Liquidity conditions and monetary policy operations in the period  

from 28 October 2015 to 26 January 2016 404 Factors behind the comparatively strong activity in euro area services
 455  The impact of the oil price decline on the current account surplus  

of the euro area 496  Oil prices and euro area consumer energy prices 517  The relationship between HICP inflation and HICP
 inflation excluding energy and food 548  The 2016 macroeconomic imbalance procedure and the imple
mentation  of the 2015 country-specific recommendations 57  A
rticles1 Transmission of output shocks Œ the role of cross-border production chains
 612 Public investment in Europe 75  Statistics S13Economic and monetary  
developmentsOverviewAt its monetary policy meeting on 10 March 2016, based on the regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council conducted a thorough review of the monetary policy stance, in which it also took into account the new macroeconomic projections by ECB staff extending into 
the year 2018. As a result, the Governing Council decided on a set of measures in the pursuit of its price stability objective. This comprehensive package will exploit 

the synergies between the different instruments and has been calibrated to further 

ease financing conditions, stimulate new credit provision and thereby reinforce 
the momentum of the euro area™s economic recovery and accelerate the return of 

inflation to levels below, but close to, 2%. 
Economic and monetary assessment at the time of the Governing Council meeting of 10 March 2016Global activity moderated at the turn of the year, and is expected to continue 
expanding at a modest pace. Low interest rates, improving labour markets and rising confidence support the outlook for advanced economies. By contrast, the medium-term outlook for emerging market economies remains more uncertain. Economic 

activity in China is expected to continue decelerating, with negative spillovers to 

other emerging market economies, particularly in Asia, while commodity exporting 

countries need to adjust further to lower commodity prices. In this context, the effective 

exchange rate of the euro has appreciated significantly over recent months.Financial markets have shown heightened volatility in recent months. Initially, 
global growth concerns contributed to a decline in the prices of riskier financial assets 

from the beginning of December 2015 to mid-February. However, more recently, these 

declines have been partly reversed, related to reduced investor concerns amid a rise 

in oil prices, better than expected economic data in the United States and expectations 

of further monetary policy stimulus in the euro area. Sovereign bond yields in higher-
rated countries have declined further in the last three months. 
The economic recovery in the euro area is continuing, albeit with lower than expected growth at the beginning of the year on the back of a weaker external 
environment. Real GDP rose by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter 

of 2015, supported by domestic demand, while being dampened by a negative 
contribution from net exports. The most recent survey data point to weaker than 

expected growth momentum at the beginning of this year. 
4Looking ahead, the economic recovery is expected to proceed at a moderate pace. Domestic demand should be further supported by the ECB™s monetary 

policy measures and their favourable impact on financing conditions, as well as by 
continued employment gains from past structural reforms. Moreover, the low price 

of oil should provide additional support for households™ real disposable income and 

private consumption, as well as for corporate profitability and investment. In addition, 
the fiscal stance in the euro area is slightly expansionary, partly reflecting measures 

in support of refugees. However, the economic recovery in the euro area continues 

to be dampened by subdued growth prospects in emerging markets, volatile financial 
markets, the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and the 
sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms.The March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.4% in 2016, 1.7% in 2017 and 1.8% in 2018. Compared with the December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised slightly down, 

mainly reflecting the weakened growth prospects for the global economy. In the 

Governing Council™s assessment, risks to the euro area growth outlook remain tilted 

to the downside and relate in particular to the heightened uncertainties regarding 
developments in the global economy, as well as to broader geopolitical risks.
According to Eurostat™s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation 
was -0.2% in February 2016, compared with 0.3% in January.
 All main HICP 

components contributed to this decline. Inflation rates should recover later in 2016 
and rise further thereafter, supported by the ECB™s monetary policy measures and 

the expected economic recovery. 
The March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.1% in 2016, 1.3% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018.  In comparison with the December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections, the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised down, mainly reflecting 

the fall in oil prices over recent months. The Governing Council will closely monitor 

price-setting behaviour and wage developments in the euro area, paying particular 
attention to ensure that the current low inflation environment does not become 
entrenched in second-round effects on wage and price-setting.
The ECB™s monetary policy measures continue to be transmitted to lending 
conditions and remain supportive of broad money and credit dynamics. Money growth has remained solid, while loan growth has continued on the path of gradual 
recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. Domestic sources of money creation 
continue to be the main driver of broad money growth. Low interest rates, as well as 
the effects of the ECB™s targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and 

the expanded asset purchase programme (APP), have contributed to improvements 
in money and credit dynamics. Banks™ funding costs have stabilised close to their 

historical lows. Despite considerable cross-country heterogeneity, banks have been 

passing on their favourable funding conditions in the form of lower lending rates. 
Improved lending conditions have continued to support a recovery in loan growth. 
The total annual flow of external financing to non-financial corporations is estimated 
to have increased further in the fourth quarter of 2015, after stabilising in the 5previous two quarters. Overall, the monetary policy measures in place since June 2014 have improved borrowing conditions for firms and households substantially.
Monetary policy decisionsThe Governing Council assessed that a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming from the monetary analysis 
confirmed the need for further monetary stimulus in order to secure a return 
of inflation rates towards levels below, but close to, 2% without undue delay
. Economic and financial conditions had weakened further since the last meeting of 
the Governing Council in January and risks to the Governing Council™s medium-term 

price stability objective had clearly increased, as also indicated by the downward 
revisions for inflation and growth in the March 2016 staff macroeconomic projections. 

As a result, the Governing Council decided on a set of measures in the pursuit of its 
price stability objective. First, as regards the key ECB interest rates, the Governing Council decided to 
lower the interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by 
5 basis points to 0.00% and the rate on the marginal lending facility by 5 basis 
points to 0.25%. The rate on the deposit facility was lowered by 10 basis points 

to -0.40%. Second, the Governing Council decided to expand the monthly purchases under 
the APP from •60 billion to •80 billion. They are intended to run until the end 

of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing 

Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its 
aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 

To ensure the continued smooth implementation of the asset purchases, the 

Governing Council also decided to increase the issuer and issue share limits 
for the purchases of securities issued by eligible international organisations and 
multilateral development banks from 33% to 50%.Third, the Governing Council decided to include investment-grade euro-
denominated bonds issued by non-bank corporations established in the euro 
area in the list of assets that are eligible for regular purchases under a new 
corporate sector purchase programme. This will further strengthen the pass-

through of the Eurosystem™s asset purchases to the financing conditions of the 

real economy. Purchases under the new programme will start towards the end of 

the second quarter of this year.
Fourth, the Governing Council decided to launch a new series of four targeted 
longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II), starting in June 2016, each 

with a maturity of four years. These new operations will reinforce the ECB™s 

accommodative monetary policy stance and will strengthen the transmission 
of monetary policy by further incentivising bank lending to the real economy. 

Counterparties will be entitled to borrow up to 30% of the stock of eligible loans 
as at 31 January 2016. The interest rate under TLTRO II will be fixed over the life 
6of each operation, at the rate on the Eurosystem™s main refinancing operations 
prevailing at the time of take-up. For banks whose net lending exceeds a 
benchmark, the rate applied to the TLTRO II will be lower, and can be as low as 

the interest rate on the deposit facility prevailing at the time of take-up. There 

will be no requirement for mandatory early repayments under TLTRO II, and 

switches from TLTRO I will be allowed.
Looking ahead, taking into account the current outlook for price stability, the 
Governing Council expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of 
the net asset purchases. Adding to the measures taken since June 2014, the comprehensive package of monetary policy decisions taken in March 2016 provides 
substantial monetary stimulus to counteract heightened risks to the ECB™s price 

stability objective. While very low or even negative inflation rates are unavoidable 
over the next few months, as a result of movements in oil prices, it is crucial to avoid 
second-round effects by securing the return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 

2% without undue delay. The Governing Council will continue to monitor very closely 

the evolution of the outlook for price stability over the period ahead. 71 External environment
Global activity slowed at the turn of the year, but is expected to continue to 
expand at a gradual pace. Low interest rates, improving labour markets and 
growing confidence support the outlook for advanced economies. By contrast, 
the medium-term outlook for emerging market economies (EMEs) remains more 
uncertain. Growth in China continues to slow, with negative spillovers to other EMEs, 

particularly in emerging Asia, and commodity
-exporting countries need to adjust further to lower commodity prices. Global economic activity and trade Developments in both advanced economies and EMEs at the end of 2015 turned out to be weaker than expected. The recovery is expected to be more gradual than anticipated, confirming that growth momentum remains fragile. 
Following robust growth in the third quarter, the US economy experienced a marked 

slowdown in the last quarter of 2015. The Japanese economy also lost momentum, contracting again in the fourth quarter. Among the major advanced countries, 

excluding the euro area, only the United Kingdom appears to have maintained 
sustained robust growth in the second half of last year. Growth momentum in EMEs 

also slowed in the last quarter of the year. Emerging Asia is one of the drivers of 

this slowdown, partly because of the ongoing rebalancing in China. Activity in Latin 

America slowed towards the end of 2015, mainly on account of the deep recession in 
Brazil and, more broadly, the adverse effects of low commodity prices on commodity-

producing countries in the region. Global activity indicators confirm that world growth moderated at the turn of the year.
 The global composite output PMI (excluding the euro area) fell 
rather sharply in February to levels just above the 

expansionary threshold (see Chart 1). The decline 

was broad based across advanced economies and 

EMEs. It was not only driven by continued subdued 

developments in global manufacturing, but also by a 

significant fall in services activity. This could indicate 

that the ongoing weakness in global manufacturing 

may be spilling over into the services sector, which 

until now has been more resilient. At the same time, 

the OECD™s composite leading indicators point to 

signs that economic growth is slowing in the OECD 

area as a whole. 
Three key factors have been shaping the global outlook, namely a tightening of financing conditions 

in EMEs, uncertainty regarding the outlook for China and the continued weakness in commodity 
prices. The tightening of financing conditions in EMEs 
(see Chart 2) is evident in the rise in government Chart 1Global composite output PMI(diffusion index)
40
50

60
70
45
50

55
60
2010201120122013201420152016
global excluding euro area (right-hand scale)
global excluding euro area Œ long-term average (right-hand scale) 
advanced economies excluding euro area (left-hand scale)
emerging market economies (left-hand scale)
Sources: Markit and ECB calculations.Note: The latest observation is for February 2016. 
8bond yields, substantial downward correction in equity prices and net capital outflows from these economies 
amid elevated levels of global market volatility. This 

volatility was partly associated with growing uncertainty 
around China™s economic prospects. Finally, the 

continued weakness in commodity prices, particularly 
oil prices, has been increasingly interpreted as a sign of 
underlying weakness in the global economy.
In response to the increased signs of global weakness, markets have pushed back expectations 
of monetary policy normalisation in the United 
States and the United Kingdom. Since the policy rate increase in the United States in December 2015 
the funds futures curve of the Federal Reserve System 
has significantly shifted downwards, suggesting 
expectations of a delay in further tightening of US 
monetary policy. Monetary policy tightened in some 

EMEs in response to the US hike, particularly in 
countries that have close trade links with the United States, such as those in Latin America, and in countries whose currencies are linked 

to the US dollar. 
While declines in commodity prices in the course of 2015 were mostly attributed to a sharp rise in supply, greater importance has been attached to 

the role of demand factors in explaining the recent downward pressures on 
oil prices. The nature of an oil price shock can have very different implications for 

the global economy (see also Box 2). The largely supply-driven drop in oil prices in 

the second half of 2014 and early 2015 had a net positive impact on global GDP, 

mainly via two channels: (i) an income redistribution from oil-producing countries to 
oil-consuming countries, which then had a larger marginal propensity to spend; and 
(ii) profitability gains from lower energy-input costs, which stimulated investment and thus total supply in net oil-importing countries. However, the gradual shift towards a more demand-driven oil price fall in the second half of last year warrants a more 
cautious interpretation. Although low oil prices could still have a positive impact on 

commodity-importing countries as a result of rising real incomes, weaker external 
demand is expected to broadly offset the positive effects of falling oil prices on 

activity. Moreover, the negative impact of additional price declines on oil-exporting 

countries has been more severe than expected. For some countries, managing 
surging fiscal imbalances in order to cushion the impact of the oil price decline may 
be challenging and could result in a greater than expected reduction in domestic and 
foreign demand. Looking ahead global economic activity should expand at a gradual pace, supported by ongoing resilient growth prospects in major advanced 
economies, and the expected progressive easing of the deep recessions 
in some large EMEs. Continued low interest rates, improving labour markets and rising consumer confidence support the outlook for advanced economies. By 
contrast, the medium-term outlook for EMEs remains more uncertain. The pace of 
Chart 2Financial conditions indices(standard deviation, zero mean; monthly data)-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5

1.0
2010201120122013201420152016
tighter financial
conditions
looser financial
conditions
advanced economiesexcluding euro area
emerging market economies
Sources: Haver Analytics and ECB staff calculations.
Notes: The latest observation is for February 2016. Emerging market economies is an 

aggregate of China, Russia, Brazil, India and Turkey. Advanced economies include the 

United States, the United Kingdom and Japan.9growth in the Chinese economy continues to slow with negative spillovers to other EMEs, particularly in emerging Asia, while commodity-exporting countries need to 

adjust further to lower commodity prices. Nevertheless, the gradual easing of the 
deep recessions in Russia and Brazil should support global growth.Domestic fundamentals remain supportive in the United States. Growth is 
expected to accelerate as the recovery in the labour market gradually feeds through 

into gains in nominal wages, which, together with continued low oil prices, support real 

disposable income and consumption. A continuation of the housing market recovery 

and a slightly expansionary fiscal stance should also support domestic demand, which 

is expected to remain the main driver of US growth. At the same time, credit and 

financing conditions have become somewhat tighter despite low interest rates, while 

lower oil prices are taking away some momentum from private investment. Net exports 

are expected to remain a drag on activity on the back of the appreciation of the US 

dollar and weak growth in foreign demand. In this context, Box 1 reviews the factors 

behind the slowdown in US labour productivity growth and its economic implications.Economic activity in the United Kingdom continues to grow at a moderate pace. Growth is largely consumption driven, as low energy prices continue to lift real 
disposable incomes. Investment growth remains positive, albeit slowing compared 
with previous years, supported by easing credit conditions. However, growth could 

potentially be restrained by the uncertainty surrounding the referendum on the 
United Kingdom™s membership of the European Union in June 2016. Net exports 

exerted a drag on growth in the last two quarters of 2015. The economic recovery in Japan has remained weak. Following a mild return to growth in the third quarter of 2015, the economy contracted again in the final quarter 
of the year amid slowing global demand and lacklustre private consumption. Looking 
ahead growth should return to positive territory in 2016, as private consumption is 
expected to recover amid higher real incomes stemming from wage increases and 
lower oil prices. Exports are also expected to pick up amid a gradual rebound in 
foreign demand. The rebalancing of the Chinese economy is translating into a gradual 
slowdown, as declining investment has not been fully offset by stronger 
consumer spending. Low oil prices and robust consumption are expected to 
provide some support for the economy in the near term. While the recent unwinding 

of excessive stock market valuations has heightened uncertainty, this is not deemed 

to have had major direct repercussions on the outlook. Recent reductions in policy 

rates, modest fiscal stimulus from the central government and efforts to loosen 

constraints on local government finances should have a positive influence on demand 

going forward. In the medium term, however, increasing emphasis on reducing 

overcapacity in some heavy industries and dealing with the related non-performing 

loans could slow the pace of expansion, primarily through the investment channel.Real economic activity in central and eastern Europe (CEE) Œ albeit uneven across countries Œ is projected to remain robust. The main drivers of growth in the region continue to be dynamic private consumption, which benefits from higher 
real disposable income amid the low inflation environment, and strong investment 
growth supported by EU structural funds. 10By contrast, commodity-exporting countries continue to face the consequences of the sustained decline in commodity prices. In Russia, which is still in the midst of a deep recession, funding costs remain elevated despite the 
easing of financial conditions that took place during 2015. The further fall in oil prices 

increased depreciation pressures on the Russian rouble, potentially resulting in 
higher inflation. Uncertainty remains high and business confidence weak, while lower 
oil revenue continues to restrain public expenditure. In Latin America, the economic 

downturn in Brazil has intensified sharply. Political uncertainty, deteriorating terms 

of trade amid falling commodity prices and tightening monetary policy and financing 
conditions are all weighing on economic activity. Looking forward, however, the 

deep recessions in Brazil and Russia are expected to ease amid stabilisation in their 
respective currencies and commodity prices.Global trade seems to have lost momentum again at the turn of the year, after 
having returned to positive growth in the second half of 2015. Global imports of 

goods and services (excluding the euro area) increased by 0.7% quarter on quarter 

in the third quarter, following a decline of 0.9% in the second quarter (see Chart
 3). The rebound partly reflects a correction of the low figures recorded in some advanced 
economies and EMEs, such as the United Kingdom, 

Japan and China, which was mainly associated with 

volatility in the data. At the same time, it accounts for 

slightly less pronounced declines in Brazil and Russia, 

countries in which the sharp fall of imports can be 

largely explained by the slump in domestic demand and 

the depreciation of the exchange rate. However, initial 

trade data and surveys for the fourth quarter suggest 

that the pace of global trade growth is slowing again. 

The growth in world imports of goods slowed to 0.7% 

(in three-month-on-three-month terms) in November, 

from 1.7% in October. Import growth momentum again 

turned negative in EMEs in the light of a sharp drop in 

emerging Asia (as well as in the Middle East and Africa). 

By contrast, import growth remained more robust in 

advanced economies, albeit also moderating somewhat 

from October. Moreover, global new export orders 

declined in February to 49.4, down from 50.4 in the 

previous month, indicating renewed weakness in world 

trade growth at the turn of the year. 
Overall, the outlook for global growth remains one of a gradual and uneven recovery. According to the March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, 
world real GDP growth excluding the euro area is projected to accelerate only very 

gradually from 3.1% in 2015 to 3.2% in 2016, 3.8% in 2017 and 3.9% in 2018. Euro 
area foreign demand is expected to expand from 0.4% in 2015 to 2.2% in 2016, 
3.8% in 2017 and 4.1% in 2018. Compared with the December 2015 projections, this 
constitutes a downward revision to world growth, reflecting the weaker than expected 
outlook in both advanced economies and EMEs. Revisions to euro area foreign 
demand are broadly in line with those to world growth.Chart 3World trade in goods
(left-hand scale: three-month-on-three-month percentage changes; right-hand scale: diffusion index)
46
50
54
58
62
-2.0
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
2010201120122013201420152016
world trade (left
-hand scale)
world trade 1991-2007 average (left-hand scale)
global PMI new export orders (right-hand scale)
global PMI excluding euro area manufacturing (right-hand scale)
Sources: Markit, CPB and ECB calculations.Note: The latest observation is for February 2016 for PMIs and December 2015 for 

world trade.11Risks to the outlook for global activity remain on the downside, most prominently for EMEs. A key downside risk is a stronger slowdown in EMEs, including China. Tightening financial conditions and heightened political uncertainty 
may exacerbate existing macroeconomic imbalances, denting confidence and 
slowing growth more than expected. Policy uncertainty about the economic transition 
in China may lead to an increase in global financial volatility. Geopolitical risks also 

continue to weigh on the outlook. Finally, persistently low oil prices are aggravating 

fiscal imbalances and raising financial stability issues in some major oil-exporting 
countries.Global price developments Global inflation has increased in recent months, but remains at rather low 
levels overall. Annual consumer price inflation in the OECD area increased further 
to 1.2% in January, from 0.9% in December, mainly because of a less negative 

contribution from energy prices (see Chart 4). Although remaining at low levels, 

this represents a significant increase relative to the last quarter of 2015 (when the 

average was 0.7%). Excluding food and energy, OECD annual inflation remained 
unchanged at 1.9% relative to the previous month, only 

marginally above the last quarter of 2015 (when it was 

1.8% on average). Energy prices continued to fall for 

the seventeenth consecutive month in January (-5.3% 

year on year), but at a slower pace, while food price 

inflation remained broadly unchanged. Among individual 

countries, headline inflation increased in Canada, the 

United Kingdom and the United States, while it fell 

within negative territory in Japan. Among major non-

OECD economies, headline inflation increased in China, 

but declined in India and Russia, while annual inflation 

remained unchanged at double-digit levels in Brazil.After falling to 12-year lows at the end of January, oil prices have since recovered somewhat. Oil 
prices experienced a renewed downturn between mid-
October 2015 and the end of January 2016 against 
the background of an oversupplied oil market and 
weakening oil demand. On the supply side, OPEC™s 

decision in December to maintain current production levels at record rates and resilient non-OPEC output fuelled downward dynamics. 
More recently, discussions about an OPEC and non-OPEC agreement on freezing 

output at January levels and supply disruptions in Iraq and Nigeria contributed to a 
slight recovery. In the face of heightened volatility, oil prices increased in February 

and early March. The global oil market continues to be oversupplied as a result of: (i) 

a low likelihood of a concerted output cut by OPEC and non-OPEC producers; (ii) the 

return of Iran to global oil markets; and (iii) weakening oil demand. OPEC members 
continue to produce at near record-high levels, and non-OPEC output also remains 
high, with Russia producing at record levels, although US shale oil production is Chart 4Consumer price inflation(year-on-year percentage changes)0246810
12
14
16

18
2010201120122013201420152016
China
Brazil
OECD aggregate
India
Russia
Sources: National sources and OECD.Note: The latest observation is for January 2016.
12showing signs of a steep decline. OECD oil inventories increased further and were at record levels at the end of the fourth quarter of 2015. Non-oil commodity prices have 
increased somewhat since the end of January on the back of higher metal prices.Global inflation is expected to remain subdued in the medium term. On the one hand, low oil and other commodity prices should dampen inflationary 
pressures further in the short term. At the same time, output gaps are closing slowly in advanced economies and are widening in several EMEs, pointing to 
continued abundant spare capacity at the global level, which is expected to further 
weigh on global underlying inflation over the medium term. On the other hand, the 
upward sloping oil futures curve implies significant increases in oil prices over the 
medium term.132 Financial developments
Recent months have been characterised by high financial market volatility. Global 
growth concerns and a further fall in oil prices contributed to a decline in the 
prices of riskier financial assets from the beginning of December 2015 to mid-February. Thereafter the declines were partly reversed as a rise in oil prices, better 

than expected economic data in the United States and expectations of further 
monetary policy stimulus in the euro area reduced investors™ concerns. Euro area equity prices declined overall by around 12% over the review period Œ i.e. from 2 December 2015 to 9 March 2016 Œ having been temporarily down by more than 20% by mid-February. At the same time, yields of higher
-rated sovereign bonds declined as investors sought safer assets. From early December 2015 to mid-February 2016, global growth concerns and a further fall in oil prices contributed to a sharp decline in the prices of risky assets, which was partly reversed thereafter. Concerns about global growth intensified at the start of 2016 amid a sharp drop in Chinese equity prices and oil prices. These concerns were also fuelled by negative economic indicators in the euro area and the United States, which led to a downward re-pricing of financial 
assets. From mid-February to early March, a rise in oil prices, better than expected 
economic indicators in the United States and expectations of further monetary policy 
stimulus in the euro area contributed to a partial rebound in riskier asset prices. 
Large fluctuations were also visible in measures of equity market volatility, which 

increased significantly until mid-February before receding somewhat towards the end 
of the review period. The EONIA declined over the review period following the Governing Council™s decision to cut the deposit facility rate by 0.10% to -0.30% in December 2015. After ranging between -13 and -15 basis points during the week before the December 2015 rate cut took effect, the EONIA then remained in a range between 
-22 and -25 basis points, with the exception of a temporary increase at the end of 2015 owing to higher demand for liquidity. The 
decline in the EONIA occurred against the backdrop 
of rising excess liquidity in the context of purchases 
under the expanded asset purchase programme. 
Box 3 presents more detailed information on euro area liquidity conditions and monetary policy operations. The EONIA forward curve flattened significantly as global uncertainty and expectations about monetary policy compressed yields across the 
curve. Longer-term EONIA forward rates declined by around 50 basis points during the review period, with somewhat smaller declines at the short end of 
the curve. This decline led to a further flattening of the curve (see Chart 5). On 9 March the lowest point of the curve stood at around -50 basis points, indicating market expectations of further reductions in the deposit 
facility rate prior to the Governing Council meeting Chart 5EONIA forward rates
(percentages per annum)-0.75
-0.50
-0.25
0.00

0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024
9 March 2016
2 December 2015
Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations.
14on 10 March. The large decline in EONIA forward rates can to some extent be 
explained by expectations of further monetary policy stimulus from the ECB, with the decline amplified by the increase in global uncertainty that led to shifts in demand for 
safer assets, including those closely linked to EONIA rates.
The GDP-weighted average of ten-year euro area sovereign bond yields declined by 11 basis points between early December and 9 March  (see Chart 6). Euro area sovereign bond yields initially increased after the meeting of the ECB™s Governing Council in early December. From the beginning 
of January 2016 the increase in global uncertainty and the build-up of market expectations of further monetary policy stimulus in the euro area exerted 
downward pressures on euro area sovereign bond 
yields, which more than reversed the increase observed 
in December. Overall, the GDP-weighted average of ten-year euro area sovereign bond yields declined by 11 basis points between early December 2015 and early March, standing at 0.9% on 9 March. There was some divergence in sovereign bond 
yields across countries, with higher-rated countries 
recording larger declines. By contrast, yields in the majority of lower-rated countries were unchanged or 
increased slightly over the same period. In Portugal, 
sovereign bond yields fluctuated significantly, reflecting 

market concerns about the state budget and the reform 
agenda of the newly elected government. The global sell-off of risky assets also affected corporate bonds, with spreads of lower-rated 
bonds increasing more than higher-rated ones. While corporate bond spreads increased, corporate 
bond yields for both financials and non-financials were 
volatile, but remained overall more or less unchanged 
over the review period (see Chart 7) as the increase in credit spreads was, on average, offset by declining risk-free rates. Corporate bond yields for both financial and 
non-financial firms remain very low from a longer-term 
perspective.Euro area equity markets strengthened towards the end of the review period, after having declined 
substiantially between early December and mid- 
February.
 Euro area equity prices, as measured by the 
broad EURO STOXX index, declined by around
 21% between early December and
 11
 February (see Chart 8) as global uncertainty increased. Between 11 February and 9 March equity prices increased again, resulting Chart 7Corporate bond yields in the euro area(percentages per annum)0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Jan.15Mar.15May15Jul.15Sep.15Nov.15Jan.16Mar.16
financials
non-financials
Sources: iBoxx and ECB.Note: The latest observation is for 9 March 2016.
Chart 6Ten-year sovereign bond yields in selected euro area 
countries(percentages per annum)01234Jan.15Mar.15May15
Jul.15Sep.15Nov.15J
an.16Mar.16
euro area 
Germ
any 
Spain 
Fr
ance 
Italy 
Port
ugal 
Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations.
Notes: The item ﬁeuro areaﬂ denotes the GDP-weighted average of ten-year sovereign 

bond yields. The latest observation is for 9 March 2016.
15in an overall decline over the review period of 12%. Prior to the recovery in equity prices, bank equities across the euro area declined significantly more than 
the overall market as concerns emerged over general 
profitability in the banking sector, coupled with some 

country and bank-specific events. Specifically, the EURO STOXX bank equity price index declined by
 35% between early December and mid-February. Thereafter, 
it increased somewhat towards the end of the review 
period, resulting in an overall decline of around 22%. Equity markets in the United States saw similar 
fluctuations, albeit smaller, with the S&P 500 index recording an overall decline of only 4%. The effective exchange rate of the euro appreciated 
significantly over the three months under review. The euro appreciated markedly in effective terms 

between early December 2015 and mid-February 2016 amid the increase in global uncertainty. Since then, the euro has slightly depreciated in effective terms and against the US dollar amid widening long-term 
bond yield spreads between the United States and the 
euro area and expectations of further monetary policy 
stimulus from the ECB. Overall, the euro strengthened 
by 3.7% in trade-weighted terms over the review period (see Chart 9). In bilateral terms, the euro appreciated by 3.4% against the US dollar over the same period. Heightened uncertainty surrounding the United 
Kingdom™s referendum on EU membership weighed on the pound sterling, resulting in the euro appreciating 
by 9.3%. The euro also appreciated strongly against the Russian rouble, the Chinese renminbi and the 
currencies of emerging market economies and 
commodity-exporting countries. Higher volatility and the 
decline in risk appetite supported the Japanese yen, 
leading to a euro depreciation against the Japanese 
currency by 5.4%.Chart 9Changes in the exchange rate of the euro against selected currencies(percentage changes)-10-50510152025
Croatian kuna
Indian rupee
Brazilian real
Taiwan dollar
Romanian leu
Danish krone
Hungarian forint
Indonesian rupiah
South Korean won
Turkish lira
Russian rouble
Swedish krona
Czech koruna
Polish zloty
Japanese yen
Swiss franc
Pound sterling
US dollar
Chinese renminbi
EER-38
since 2 December 2015
since 9 March 2015
Source: ECB.Notes: Percentage changes relative to 9 March 2016. EER-38 is the nominal effective 

exchange rate of the euro against the currencies of 38 of the euro area™s most 

important trading partners.Chart 8Euro area and US equity price indices(1 January 2015 = 100)85
90

95
100
105
110
115

120
125
Jan.15Mar.15May15Jul.15Sep.15Nov.15Jan.16Mar.16
EURO STOXX
S&P 500
Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations.
Note: The latest observation is for 9 March 2016.
163 Economic activity
The economic recovery in the euro area is continuing, albeit with signs of a moderation in growth at the beginning of the year due to a weaker external 
environment. Real GDP growth was 0.3% quarter on quarter in the fourth quarter 

of 2015, unchanged from the previous quarter. The latest survey indicators point to 

weaker than expected growth momentum at the beginning of 2016. Looking ahead, 
the economic recovery is expected to proceed at  a moderate pace. Domestic 
demand should be further supported by the ECB™s monetary policy measures and 

their favourable impact on financial conditions, the slightly expansionary fiscal 
stance, and the favourable impact on employment of past structural reforms. The 
low price of oil should provide additional support for households™ real disposable 

income and corporate profitability, and thus for private consumption and investment. 

However, the economic recovery continues to be dampened by subdued growth 

prospects in emerging markets, volatile financial markets, the necessary balance 
sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and the sluggish pace of implementation 
of structural reforms. The March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections foresee 
somewhat lower euro area real GDP growth in 2016, at 1.4% (revised down from 

1.7%), in 2017, at 1.7% (revised down from 1.9%) and in 2018, at 1.8%. The economic recovery in the euro area is continuing but global developments are weighing on the short-term outlook. Real GDP grew by 0.3% quarter 
on quarter in the fourth quarter of 2015, unchanged from the previous quarter, 
with continued positive contributions from private 
consumption, albeit to a lesser extent than in the 
previous quarter, a pick-up in investment and 

a continued rise in government consumption 
(see Chart 10).1 As a result, the level of output stood 
around 3% above its recent trough and only 0.2% 
below its pre-crisis peak in the first quarter of 2008. In 
2015 as a whole, real GDP grew by 1.6%, its strongest 

increase since 2011. 
The slowdown in emerging market economies weighed on euro area export growth throughout 
2015 and headwinds continued to strengthen in the 
last quarter. 
The slowdown in China, weak demand 
in Russia and the recession in Brazil remained a drag 
on euro area goods exports (see Chart 11). This led 

to a negative net export contribution of 0.3 percentage 
point to real GDP growth in the last quarter of 2015. 

While the slowing of demand in some large emerging 
market economies such as China had adverse effects 

on euro area activity, the impact through the trade 
1 Eurostat™s second release of the euro area national accounts revised real GDP growth upwards 
by 0.1 percentage point for both the first and second quarters of 2015.Chart 10Euro area real GDP and its composition
(quarter-on-quarter percentage changes and quarter-on-quarter percentage point contributions)-1
-0.5
00.5
1201020112012201320142015
real GDP growth
private consumption
government consumption
gross fixed capital formation
net exports
changes in inventories
Source: Eurostat.Note: The lastest observation is for the fourth quarter of 2015.
17channel is not likely to be as great as traditional gross trade figures would normally imply.
2 The slowing of 
growth in emerging markets over the course of 2015 
was partly offset by the strength of domestic demand in 

the euro area, which supported intra-euro area trade. 
In addition, demand from other advanced economies 
(particularly those within Europe) was also relatively 
strong. Combined with favourable euro exchange rate 
developments from mid-2014 onwards, this supported 
growth in euro area exports, leading to significant gains 
in export market shares for euro area exporters.Both export orders and sentiment indicators point to rather subdued global trade developments in the 
near term. Moreover, the effective exchange rate of the 

euro appreciated in the first few months of 2016, which 
will diminish the favourable impact of the previous 
depreciation of the currency (2014-15) further ahead. 
However, as global activity gradually picks up, euro 

area export growth is expected to increase and gain 
more momentum in line with foreign demand. At the sector level, services value added has exceeded its pre-crisis level, while industry and 
construction have not yet done so (see Chart 12). 
The ongoing economic recovery has largely been 
driven by private consumption and thus benefited the 
services sector, with value added in this sector now standing 3% above its pre-crisis peak.3 For industry (excluding construction), value added growth in 2015 
was hampered by the weak external environment and 
currently stands below its pre-crisis peak. Construction, 
which suffered a considerable decline due to large 

housing market corrections following the 2008-09 
crisis in a number of countries, has stabilised at low 
levels. In the fourth quarter of 2015, value added 
growth continued to increase in the services sector 
and rebounded somewhat in the construction sector 
following the relatively mild weather conditions, which supported construction activity in some euro area countries. At the same time, value 

added in industry (excluding construction) declined. Survey data available to February point to moderate growth at the beginning of the year.
 Both the European Commission™s Economic Sentiment Indicator (ESI) 
2 See the article entitled ﬁTransmission of output shocks Œ the role of cross-border production chainsﬂ in 
this issue of the Economic Bulletin.3 See also the box entitled ﬁFactors behind the comparatively strong activity in euro area servicesﬂ in this 

issue of the Economic Bulletin.Chart 11
Total euro area exports of goods
(year-on-year percentage changes and year-on-year percentage point contributions)-4
-2
02462012
2013
2014
2015
total
United States
Asia excluding China
China, Russia, Latin America
non-euro area Europe
intra-euro exports
other
Source: Eurostat.Notes: The latest observation is for the fourth quarter of 2015. For EU Countries, the 

fourth quarter is based on data for October and November.
Chart 12Euro area real gross value added by economic activity(index: Q1 2008 = 100)75
80
85

90

95
100

105
20082009201020112012201320142015
total gross value added
services
construction
industry excluding construction
Source: Eurostat.Note: The latest observation is for the fourth quarter of 2015. 
18and the composite output Purchasing Managers™ 
Index (PMI) declined over the first two months of 2016 (see Chart 13) but remain above their respective  long-term average levels. The declines in sentiment 

have been rather broad-based among business sectors 
and households and relate to expectations about 
demand and production, as well as to households™ 

assessments of their current economic situation. Investment growth gathered momentum in the fourth quarter, most likely due to investment in 

both construction and non-construction equipment. Following weak investment growth in the second 
and third quarters of 2015, the pick-up in investment 
growth in the fourth quarter was relatively broad-based 
across euro area countries. Looking forward, non-
construction investment is expected to recover on the 
back of gradually strengthening demand, improving 
profit margins and further diminishing spare capacity. 

Financing conditions are also improving and ample 
supplies of cash among euro area firms should be 
available for investment. Likewise, highly favourable 
financing conditions and low mortgage rates, together 
with growth in households™ disposable income, 

should bolster demand for residential property in the 
period ahead and support construction investment. 
Indeed, signs of strengthening housing markets and 
increases in applications for building permits in some 
countries tend to confirm this picture (see Chart 14). 
Moreover, construction-related survey indicators at 

the beginning of 2016 suggest a strengthening in 
the underlying growth momentum of construction 
investment. Nevertheless, the further need for corporate 
deleveraging in some countries, recent financial market 
volatility, weaker growth prospects in emerging market 

economies and investors™ reduced long-term growth 

expectations may slow the recovery in investment.Private consumption, which has been the main driver of the ongoing recovery, moderated at the 
end of 2015. This partly reflected a dampening impact on seasonal clothing sales 

and energy consumption due to the relatively mild weather conditions, as well as 
the November terrorist attacks in Paris. Data on retail trade and new passenger 
car registrations for January point to a rebound in consumer spending and tend to 
confirm that the slowing of private consumption growth in the last quarter of 2015 
was temporary. From a broader perspective, consumer spending has benefitted 

from rising real disposable income among households, primarily reflecting rising 
employment, lower oil prices and a fairly stable saving ratio. Moreover, households™ 
Chart 13Euro area real GDP, the Economic Sentiment Indicator 
and the composite output Purchasing Managers™ Index
(left-hand scale: diffusion index and percentage balances; right-hand scale: quarterly 
growth rates)-3
-2
-1
0122010201120122013201420152016
real GDP (right-hand scale)
ESI (left-hand scale)
composite PMI (left-hand scale)
Sources: Markit, DG-ECFIN and Eurostat.Notes: The latest observation is for the fourth quarter of 2015 for real GDP, 

January 2016 for the ESI and February 2016 for the PMI. The ESI and PMI are 

normalised.Chart 14Building permits(index: 2010 = 100, three-month moving averages)65
80
95
110
125
140
155
170

185
20082009201020112012201320142015
building permits, total
residential
non-residential
Sources: Eurostat and ECB staff calculations.
Note: The series are seasonally adjusted, with the exception of non-residential building 

permits, which are not seasonally adjusted. 19balance sheets have gradually become less constrained and consumer confidence has remained relatively strong due to declining unemployment rates. The euro area unemployment rate has continued to decline but remains high.  
In January 2016, the unemployment rate stood at 10.3%, its lowest rate since mid-2011 (see Chart 15). Employment has been increasing steadily since 2013 and total 

euro area employment increased by over two million in the third quarter of 2015. 
However, since the crisis, there has been a divergence 

between headcount employment and total hours worked, 

primarily driven by a cyclical decline in the working 

hours of full-time workers and an increase in the use of 

part-time workers, mainly in the services sector. Wider 

measures of labour market slack Œ which also take into account sectors of the population that are involuntarily 

working part-time or that have withdrawn from the labour 

market Œ remain high. With roughly seven million people 

(5% of the labour force) currently involuntarily working 

part-time owing to a lack of full-time work and more than 

six million discouraged workers (those who have given 

up looking for work and have withdrawn from the labour 

market), the euro area labour market likely exhibits more 

slack than suggested by the unemployment rate alone. 
The economic recovery is projected to strengthen, 
albeit dampened by weaker than expected foreign 

demand. Headwinds stemming from weaker growth 
in emerging market economies, a strengthening of 

the effective exchange rate of the euro, weakened 

sentiment and increased financial market volatility will 

weigh on euro area activity in the short term. Looking 

further ahead, the domestic demand-led recovery 

should continue to be supported by the effects of the 

ECB™s monetary policy measures, which continue to 

be transmitted to the real economy as indicated by the 

further easing of credit conditions. Domestic demand 

should be further supported by improving labour markets, 

lower oil prices, the slightly expansionary fiscal stance 

and an eventual pick-up in euro area foreign demand. At 

the same time, the economic recovery in the euro area 

continues to be dampened by subdued growth prospects 

in emerging market economies and the sluggish pace of 

implementation of structural reforms.4 The March ECB staff projections foresee annual real GDP growth to be 1.4% in 2016, 1.7% in 2017 and 1.8% in 2018 (see Chart 16). The downward 
4 See the box entitled ﬁThe 2016 macroeconomic imbalance procedure and the implementation of the 
2015 country-specific recommendationsﬂ in this issue of the Economic Bulletin.Chart 15Employment, employment expectations and unemployment rate(quarter-on-quarter percentage changes; diffusion index; percentage of labour force)
678910
11
12
13
14
-1
-0.8

-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
00.2
0.4
0.6
200820092010201120122013201420152016
employment (left-hand scale)
PMI employment expectations (left-hand scale)
unemployment rate (right-hand scale)
Sources: Eurostat, DG-ECFIN and ECB calculations.Note: The latest observation is for the third quarter of 2015 for employment, 

January 2016 for the unemployment rate and February 2016 for the PMI employment 
expectations.Chart 16Euro area real GDP (including projections)
(quarter-on-quarter percentage changes)-1.5
-1
-0.5
00.5
11.5
201020112012201320142015201620172018
real GDP
projection range
Sources: Eurostat and the article entitled ﬁMarch 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro areaﬂ, published on the ECB™s website on 10 March 2016.
20revision of real GDP growth compared with the December projections mainly reflects 
the combined adverse impact of lower euro area foreign demand and the stronger 
effective exchange rate of the euro on export growth, as well as the negative impact 

of heightened financial market volatility and weaker sentiment indicators. The risks 

to the euro area growth outlook remain on the downside, reflecting in particular 
heightened uncertainties regarding developments in emerging market economies 
and broader geopolitical risks. 214 Prices and costs 
According to Eurostat™s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 
-0.2% in February 2016, compared with 0.3% in January. 
All main HICP components 
contributed to this decline. Looking ahead, on the basis of current futures prices for energy, inflation rates are expected to remain at negative levels in the coming 

months and to pick up later in 2016. Thereafter, supported by the ECB™s monetary 

policy measures and the expected economic recovery, inflation rates should 

recover further. This broad pattern is also reflected in the March 2016 ECB staff 
macroeconomic projections for the euro area, which 
foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.1% in 2016, 1.3% 

in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018. In comparison with the 
December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, the outlook for HICP 

inflation has been revised down, mainly reflecting the 
fall in oil prices over recent months.Headline inflation moved back into negative 
territory in February. 
According to Eurostat™s flash 

estimate, headline inflation fell to -0.2%, down from 

0.3% in January, with all main components of the HICP 

contributing to the decline (see Charts 17 and 18). The 

recent further drop in oil prices brought down the already 

negative annual rate of energy price inflation even 

further. At the same time, the moderate increases in food 

price inflation and in HICP inflation excluding food and 

energy also slowed. 
The path of energy inflation continues to shape the profile of headline inflation. After a low of -8.9% 
in September 2015, the year-on-year HICP energy 

inflation rate recovered to -5.4% in January 2016, 
owing mainly to upward base effects. This development 

accounted for most of the recovery in the headline 
HICP inflation rate from -0.1% in September 2015 to 

0.3% in January 2016. However, renewed oil price 

declines in December 2015 and January 2016 caused 
HICP energy inflation to fall again to a year-on-year rate 

of -8.0% in February, accounting for approximately half 

of the decline in headline HICP inflation (see Chart 18). 

The strongest impact of oil prices on energy inflation is 
visible in fuel prices (see Box 6). Increases in food price inflation have continued to unwind in recent months. Having followed an upward trend for most of 2015, food price inflation started to 
decline in the third quarter, falling from a year-on-year 

rate of 1.6% in October 2015 to 0.7% in February 2016, 
according to Eurostat™s flash estimate. This decline was 
Chart 17Euro area HICP inflation (including projections)
(annual percentage changes)-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
201020112012201320142015201620172018
HICP inflation
projectionrange
Sources: Eurostat, March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections and ECB 
calculations.
Note: The latest observation is for the fourth quarter of 2015 (actual data) and the 

fourth quarter of 2018 (projections).Chart 18Contribution of components to euro area headline HICP inflation
(annual percentage changes; percentage point contributions)-2.0
-1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
2010201120122013201420152016
HICP
food
energy
non-energy industrial goods
services
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.
22driven almost entirely by unprocessed food prices, as a result of the unwinding of the upward effects of last summer™s unusually hot weather on vegetable and food prices. 

By contrast, processed food price inflation continued to increase during that period. 
Overall, however, food price inflation remains at a relatively low level by historical 

standards.1Measures of underlying inflation fail to show any clear upward trend. Following an upward movement in 
the first half of 2015, HICP inflation excluding food and energy hovered between year-on-year rates of 0.9% 
and 1.1% from July 2015 to January 2016 and has 
therefore been much more stable than headline inflation  

(see Box 7). Other measures of underlying inflation also 
remained relatively stable during the same period (see 
Chart 19). In February, the annual rate of HICP inflation 

excluding food and energy declined to 0.7% Œ its lowest 
level since April 2015. This decrease resulted from 

lower year-on-year rates of increase in both the prices 
of services (1.0%, following 1.2% in January) and of 
non-energy industrial goods (0.3%, following 0.7% in 
January). When interpreting the latest data for HICP 

inflation excluding food and energy, it should be borne 

in mind that annual rates of change in services prices 
and non-energy industrial goods prices can be highly 
volatile from one month to another. This volatility can 

stem, for example, from variations in the timing and extent of end-of-season sales of clothing and footwear, or from calendar effects for 

travel-related items. However, there may be other more fundamental factors affecting 

developments in underlying inflation, such as the indirect downward impact of recent 
further oil price declines (notably on some transport-related services prices). In 
addition, the recent appreciation of the effective exchange rate of the euro could 

mean that the anticipated upturn (particularly in durable goods prices) as a result of 
the earlier depreciation may not fully materialise. Import prices have grown less strongly recently, but remain the main source 
of upward pipeline pressures. In 2015 import price inflation in consumer goods excluding food and energy was buoyant, reaching a record high of 5.6% in April of 

that year. Owing to the recent appreciation of the effective exchange rate of the euro 

and also to the impact of global disinflationary pressures stemming from lower oil 
prices, import price inflation in consumer goods excluding food and energy has since 
fallen, reaching 1.6% in January 2016. However, it remained the principal source 

of inflationary pressures, given that pipeline pressures from domestic sources were 
generally more subdued. Notably, the inflation rate in domestic producer prices for 

non-food consumer goods remained stable at 0.2% for six consecutive months up to 
January 2016. Survey data on input and output prices for the period up to February 
2016 also point to a continuation of subdued domestic price pressures at the 
producer level. 1 For a more detailed discussion, see the box entitled ﬁRecent developments in euro area food pricesﬂ, 
Economic Bulletin, Issue 6, ECB, 2015.Chart 19Measures of underlying inflation(annual percentage changes)0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

2.0
2.5
3.0
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
HICP excl
uding fo
od and energy 
range of 
underlyi
ng inflati
on m
easures 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Notes: In the range of underlying measures, the following have been considered: HICP 

excluding energy; HICP excluding unprocessed food and energy; HICP excluding food 

and energy; trimmed mean (10%); trimmed mean (30%); the median of the HICP;
and a measure based on a dynamic factor model. The latest observations are for 



(all other measures).23Wage growth has remained subdued. 
At an annual average of 1.2%, growth in compensation per employee was lower in the first three quarters of 2015 than in 
2014 (1.4%). This was due to weaker negotiated wage 

growth (1.5% in 2015, following 1.7% in 2014) and a 
decline in social security contributions primarily related 
to country-specific factors (see Chart 20). Wage growth 

is likely being held back by a range of factors, including 
continued elevated levels of slack in the labour market, 
low inflation and the ongoing effects of labour market 

reforms implemented in past years in a number of euro 
area countries. Weak growth in wages is also reflecting 

relatively weak productivity growth, which can partly 
be explained by the fact that much of the recent strong 
growth in employment has taken place in the services 
sector, where productivity and wage levels have been 

relatively low.
Market-based indicators of long-term inflation expectations have fallen since mid-January in a 
turbulent market environment, while survey-based 
measures have remained more stable. Short to long-term market-based indicators of inflation expectations 
continue to stand at very low levels, with the five-year 
forward inflation rate five years ahead reaching a new 
all-time low in February. These exceptionally low levels 
in part reflect relatively weak appetite in the market 
for holding financial instruments with inflation-linked 
cash flows. This indicates that market participants 

consider it very unlikely that inflation will pick up soon. 
At the same time, market-based measures of inflation 
expectations may currently be somewhat distorted amid 
renewed market turbulence and a flight to liquidity. More 

specifically, the five-year inflation-linked swap rate five 

years ahead declined from 1.58% to 1.46% between 
18 January 2016 and 9 March 2016 (see Chart 21). Despite the low level of actual inflation and declining 
market-based inflation indicators, the deflation risk priced in by the market continues to be very limited. In contrast to market-based 
measures, survey-based measures of long-term inflation expectations, such as those 
included in the ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and in Consensus 
Economics surveys, have been more stable and resilient to the downward 
adjustment of shorter-term expectations. The results of the latest SPF showed the average point forecast for inflation five years ahead standing at 1.8%.Looking forward, HICP inflation for the euro area is projected to remain low 
in 2016 but to pick up in 2017 and 2018. Based on the information available in mid-March, the March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area 

foresee that HICP inflation will remain very low at 0.1% in 2016, rising to 1.3%  
Chart 20Euro area wage developments(annual percentage changes; percentage points)-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

2.0
2.5
201020112012201320142015
growth in compensation per employee
negotiated wages
social security contributions
wage drift
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Note: The latest observations are for the fourth quarter of 2015 (negotiated wages) and 

the third quarter of 2015 (all other indicators).Chart 21Market-based measures of inflation expectations(annual percentage changes)0.0
0.5
1.0

1.5

2.0
2.5
3.0
Jan. 2014July 2014Jan. 2015July 2015Jan. 2016
one-year rate one year ahead
one-year rate two years ahead
one-year rate four years ahead
one-year rate nineyears ahead
five-year rate five years ahead
Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations.
Note: The latest observations are for 9 March 2016.
24in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018 (see Chart 17).2 Over the projection horizon, developments in energy price inflation are expected to play a major role in shaping the profile of HICP inflation. The contribution of energy price inflation is forecast to 

be negative in 2016 but to turn positive in 2017 as a result of increases in oil prices 
(in line with oil futures prices) and strong upward base effects. Underlying inflation 

(as measured, for example, by HICP inflation excluding food and energy) is expected 

to increase gradually in the coming years as improving labour market conditions 
and declining economic slack translate into higher wages and profit margins. This 

increase will be supported by the effects of the ECB™s monetary policy measures 

and the continuing pass-through of previous declines in the effective exchange rate 

of the euro. Compared with the December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 

projections for the euro area, the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised 

downwards, mainly on the back of lower energy price inflation.2 See the article entitled ﬁMarch 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro areaﬂ, published 
on the ECB™s website on 10 March 2016.255 Money and credit
Money growth has remained solid, while loan growth is recovering only gradually. 
Domestic sources of money creation continue to be the main driver of broad money 
growth. Low interest rates, as well as the effects of the ECB™s targeted longer
-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and the expanded asset purchase programme (APP), have contributed to improvements in money and credit dynamics. Banks™ 

funding costs have stabilised close to their historical lows. Despite considerable 
cross-country heterogeneity, banks have been passing on their favourable funding conditions in the form of lower lending rates. Improved lending conditions have 
continued to support a recovery in loan growth. The total annual flow of external 
financing to non-financial corporations (NFCs) is estimated to have increased further in the fourth quarter of 2015, after stabilising in the previous two quarters.Broad money growth remained solid. The annual growth rate of M3 stayed strong at 5.0% in January 2016, unchanged from the fourth quarter of 2015 (see Chart 22). Money growth was once again supported by the most liquid components of the broad 
monetary aggregate M3. The annual growth rate of M1 decreased in January
 2016, but maintained a high level. Overall, recent developments in narrow money suggest 
that the euro area remains on a path of economic recovery.Overnight deposits, which account for a significant proportion of M1, continued to boost M3 growth (see Chart 23). The very low interest rate environment is providing incentives for holding the most liquid components of M3. 
This development also reflects inflows relating to the sale of public sector bonds, 
covered bonds and asset-backed securities by the money-holding sector in the 
context of the APP. By contrast, short-term deposits other than overnight deposits 
(i.e. M2 minus M1) contracted further, albeit to a lesser extent than in previous 

months. The growth rate of marketable instruments (i.e. M3 minus M2), a
 small Chart 22M3, M1 and loans to the private sector(annual percentage changes; adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects)
-4
-2
02
4
6810
12

14
20082009201020112012201320142015
M3
M1
loans to the private sector
2016
Source: ECB.Note: The latest observation is for January 2016. 
Chart 23M3 and its components(annual percentage changes; contributions in percentage points; adjusted for seasonal and calendar effects)
-8
-6
-4

-2
0246
8101220082009201020112012201320142015
M3
currency in circulation
overnight deposits
marketable instruments
other short-term deposits
2016
Source: ECB.Note: The latest observation is for January 2016.
26component of M3, was negative around the turn of the year, despite the recovery in 
money market fund shares/units observed since mid-2014. Domestic sources of money creation were again the main driver of broad money 
growth. This development is partly explained by the ECB™s non-standard monetary 
policy measures. From a counterpart perspective, the largest sources of money 

creation in January 2016 were the bond purchases made by the Eurosystem in the context of the public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and shifts away from longer-
term financial liabilities. A significant percentage of those assets were purchased from 

MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem). The annual rate of change of MFIs™ longer-term 

financial liabilities (excluding capital and reserves) remained strongly negative at 

-6.9% in January 2016, broadly the same as in the fourth quarter of 2015. This reflects 
the flatness of the yield curve, linked to the ECB™s non-standard monetary policy 

measures, which has reduced incentives for investors to hold longer-term bank assets. 

The attractiveness of the TLTROs as an alternative to longer-term market-based bank 

funding is a further explanatory factor. In addition, money creation continued to be 

supported by credit from MFIs to the euro area private sector. The MFI sector™s net 

external asset position was again a drag on annual M3 growth. This development 

reflects capital outflows from the euro area and the ongoing portfolio rebalancing in 

favour of non-euro area instruments (more specifically, the euro area government 

bonds sold by non-residents under the PSPP).Loan dynamics recovered gradually, but bank lending was still weak.
1 The annual growth rate of MFI loans to the private sector was broadly stable in the fourth quarter of 2015 and January 2016 (see Chart 22). While the annual growth rate 1 On 21 September 2015, the ECB published new data on loans adjusted for sales and securitisation, 
based on an enhanced adjustment method. For more details, see the box entitled ﬁNew data on loans 
to the private sector adjusted for sales and securitisationﬂ in Issue 7 / 2015 of the Economic Bulletin.Chart 24MFI loans to NFCs in selected euro area countries(annual percentage changes)-20
-10
010
20
30
40
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
euro area 
Germ
any 
Fr
ance 
Italy 
Spain 
Netherl
ands 
cross-co
untry dispersion 
Source: ECB.Notes: Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. The cross-country dispersion is 



12 euro area countries. The latest observation is for January 2016.
Chart 25MFI loans to households in selected euro area countries(annual percentage changes)-10
-5
0510

15

20

25

30
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
euro area 
Germ
any 
Fr
ance 
Italy 
Spain 
Netherl
ands 
cross-c
ountry dis
persion 
Source: ECB.Notes: Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. The cross-country dispersion is 



12 euro area countries. The latest observation is for January 2016. 
27of loans to NFCs remained subdued (see Chart 24), it has recovered substantially from the trough of the first quarter of 2014. This improvement is broadly shared by the largest countries, though loan growth rates still remained negative in some jurisdictions. Similarly, the annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted 

for sales and securitisation) picked up slightly in the fourth quarter of 2015 and January 2016 (see Chart 25). The significant reductions in bank lending rates seen across the euro area since summer 2014 (notably owing to the ECB™s non-standard monetary policy measures) and improvements in the supply of and demand for bank 
loans have supported these developments. However, the ongoing consolidation of 

bank balance sheets and persistently high levels of non-performing loans in some 
countries continue to hamper loan growth.Changes in both credit standards and loan demand continued to foster the advancement in loan growth. The January 2016 euro area bank lending survey identified the low general level of interest rates, increased financing needs for fixed 
investment and housing market prospects as important drivers of increasing loan 
demand (see survey at: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/money/surveys/lend/html/
index.en.html). In this context, the APP had a net easing impact on credit standards 
and particularly on credit terms and conditions. Banks 
also reported that the additional liquidity from the APP 

and the TLTROs was used to grant loans, as well as 

to replace funding from other sources. Despite these 
positive trends, loan dynamics remained weak and 
continued to reflect factors such as subdued economic 
conditions and the consolidation of bank balance 
sheets. Moreover, in some parts of the euro area, tight 

lending conditions are still weighing on loan supply.
 Banks™ funding costs remained close to their 
historical lows, despite the repricing of bonds that 
occurred at the beginning of 2016.The composite cost of bank funding has been declining for a number 
of years (see Chart 26) against the backdrop of net redemption of MFIs™ longer-term financial liabilities. In general, the ECB™s accommodative monetary policy 

stance, a strengthening of balance sheets and receding 
fragmentation across financial markets have supported 
the decrease in banks™ composite funding costs. 

Meanwhile, as regards banks™ access to funding, the 

January 2016 euro area bank lending survey shows that, with the exception of securitisation, no further improvements were noticeable in 
the fourth quarter of 2015 for the other major funding instruments. Bank lending rates for NFCs and households were stable in January 2016, but have declined significantly over the last four years (see charts 27 and 28). Notwithstanding recent signs of stabilisation, composite lending rates for NFCs and 
households have declined by significantly more than market reference rates since 
June 2014. This development is also related to receding fragmentation in euro area financial markets and the improvement in the pass-through of monetary policy Chart 26Banks™ composite cost of debt financing
(composite cost of deposit and unsecured market-based debt financing; percentages per annum)euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
0123
4562008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Sources: ECB, Merrill Lynch Global Index and ECB calculations.
Notes: The composite cost of deposits is calculated as an average of new business 

rates on overnight deposits, deposits with an agreed maturity and deposits redeemable 
at notice, weighted by their corresponding outstanding amounts. The latest observation 

is for January 2016. 28measures to bank lending rates. Furthermore, the decrease in banks™ composite 
funding costs has supported the decline in composite lending rates. Since the 
ECB™s credit easing package was announced in June
 2014, banks have been passing on the decline in their funding costs in the form of lower lending rates. 
Between May 2014 and January 2016, the composite lending rate on loans to euro area NFCs fell by more than 80 basis points to 2.09%. Over the same period, the composite lending rate on loans to households for house purchase decreased by 
more than 60 basis points, reaching 2.23% in January 2016. Moreover, the spread between interest rates charged on very small loans (loans of up to •0.25 million) and those charged on large loans (loans of above •1 million) in the euro area has followed a downward path since the start of credit easing. Overall, this indicates that 
small and medium-sized enterprises are benefiting to a larger extent than large firms 
from the recent lending rate developments.The APP and the aforementioned credit easing package have contributed to a significant decline in the cross-country dispersion of borrowing costs for NFCs (as measured by the standard deviation). Vulnerable euro area countries 

have seen particularly strong reductions in bank lending rates. However, despite 

some encouraging improvements in credit supply conditions at the level of the euro 
area as a whole, credit standards continue to vary across both countries and sectors.The total annual flow of external financing to euro area NFCs is estimated to have increased again in the fourth quarter of 2015, after stabilising in the previous two quarters. NFCs™ external financing now stands at levels similar to those witnessed in autumn 2011 (the post-crisis peak) and end-2004 (before the period of excessive credit growth started). The recovery in NFCs™ external financing 

seen since early 2014 has been supported by the strengthening of economic activity, further declines in the cost of bank lending, the easing of bank lending conditions Chart 27Composite lending rates for NFCs(percentages per annum; three-month moving averages)0.0
0.2
0.4

0.6
0.8
1.0

1.2

1.4
1.6
1.8
01
234
5672008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
euro area 
Germ
any 
Fr
ance 
Italy 
Spain 
Netherl
ands 
cross-c
ountry sta
ndard 
deviati
on (right-hand scale)
Source: ECB.Notes: The indicator for the total cost of bank borrowing is calculated by aggregating 

short and long-term rates using a 24-month moving average of new business volumes. 
countries. The latest observation is for January 2016. 
Chart 28Composite lending rates for house purchase(percentages per annum; three-month moving averages)0.0
0.1
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7
0.8
0.9

1.0
0123
4
5
67200820092010201120122013201420152016
 euro area 
Germany 
France 
Italy 
Spain 
Net
herlands 
cross-c
ountry st
andard 
deviati
on (ri
ght-hand scale)
Source: ECB.Notes: The indicator for the total cost of bank borrowing is calculated by aggregating 

short and long-term rates using a 24-month moving average of new business volumes. 
countries. The latest observation is for January 2016. 
29and the still very low cost of market-based debt. Meanwhile, NFCs further increased their cash holdings in the fourth quarter of 2015, bringing these to a new historical high Œ a development linked to low opportunity costs and greater uncertainty within 
financial marketsNFCs™ net issuance of debt securities turned negative in January 2016. This contraction was most likely driven by high market volatility and the postponement of planned issuance. Retained earnings registered a double-digit annual growth 
rate in the third quarter of last year. It is very likely that this ongoing strong growth in retained earnings has also weighed on net issuance in recent months. Since 
May 2015, debt securities issuance has been substantially weaker than in the first months of last year, when it was boosted by the announcement and implementation of the APP. The net issuance of quoted shares by NFCs has also remained subdued 

since mid-2015.The total nominal cost of external financing for euro area NFCs has increased moderately since December 2015, after reaching a historical low last November. This trend mainly reflects the higher cost of equity financing resulting 
from the decline in stock prices related to a downward revision of the outlook for 
global economic growth and company profits. At the same time, the cost of market-

based debt financing has increased only slightly. 
306 Fiscal developments
The euro area budget deficit is projected to remain broadly unchanged over the projection horizon, as a slightly expansionary fiscal policy stance is expected to 
offset the deficit-reducing impact of improving cyclical conditions and decreasing interest payments. Although the current aggregate euro area fiscal stance can be considered as broadly appropriate, the fiscal stance in several Member States raises 
concerns in terms of risks of non-compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). In particular in the countries with high debt levels, additional consolidation 
efforts are needed to set their public debt ratio firmly on a downward path, thereby 
increasing resilience to adverse shocks.The euro area general government budget deficit is expected to remain broadly 
unchanged over the projection horizon, interrupting the downward trend that started in 2011. Based on the March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections1, the general government deficit ratio for the euro area is expected to remain at 2.1% of GDP until 2017, before marginally declining by 0.1 percentage point in 2018 (see Table
 1). Compared with the December 2015 projections, the fiscal outlook has worsened slightly over the projection horizon, inter alia owing to carry-over effects following a downward revision of 2015 nominal GDP and slightly more expansionary fiscal policy measures. The euro area fiscal stance2 is expected to be slightly expansionary over the projection horizon. The slight loosening of the aggregate fiscal stance can be viewed as broadly appropriate in light of the still fragile recovery. The loosening 
is largely the result of discretionary tax cuts as well as increases in government 
expenditure related to the inflow of refugees, which are projected to fully offset 

the favourable contribution of the cyclical component and the positive impact of 
lower interest payments on the nominal deficit. The loosening of the fiscal stance is 
1 See the March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area (
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecbstaffprojections201603.en.pdf). 2 The fiscal stance is measured as the change in the structural balance, i.e. the cyclically adjusted 

balance net of temporary measures such as government support to the financial sector.Table 1
Fiscal developments in the euro area(percentages of GDP)201320142015201620172018a. Total revenue 
46.646.846.646.346.045.9b. Total expenditure 
49.649.448.748.548.147.9of which:c. Interest expenditure 2.82.72.42.22.12.1d. Primary expenditure (b - c)46.846.746.346.246.045.8Budget balance (a - b)-3.0-2.6-2.1-2.1-2.1-2.0Primary budget balance (a - d)-0.20.10.30.10.00.1Cyclically adjusted budget balance-2.3-1.9-1.8-2.1-2.2-2.1Structural balance-2.2-1.8-1.7-2.1-2.2-2.1Gross debt91.192.191.190.890.089.2Memo item: real GDP (percentage changes)
-0.20.91.51.41.71.8Sources: Eurostat, ECB and March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections.

31projected to be particularly sizeable in Germany, Italy and the Netherlands, whereas 
some further consolidation efforts are expected in Ireland and Cyprus.
Euro area government debt will decline only gradually from its elevated level. The euro area debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to decline slowly from its peak of
 92.1% of GDP in 2014 to reach 89.2% of GDP by the end of 2018. The projected reduction in government debt, which is lower than expected in the December 2015 projections, is supported by favourable developments in the interest rate-growth differential, in light of the projected economic recovery and assumed low interest rates. In 
addition, small primary surpluses and negative deficit-debt adjustments, inter alia 
reflecting privatisation receipts, will also contribute to the better debt outlook. In a few 
countries, however, the debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to increase over the projection 

horizon. By 2018 a large majority of euro area countries will continue to have a debt-to-GDP ratio well above the 60% reference value. Further consolidation efforts are needed to set the public debt ratio firmly on 
a downward path. Countries with high debt levels are particularly vulnerable in the event of renewed financial market instability, given the still strong fiscal-financial nexus. Moreover, their capacity to accommodate potential adverse shocks is rather 

limited. In its recently published Fiscal Sustainability Report 20153, the European Commission identified eight euro area countries, namely Belgium, Ireland, Spain, 
France, Italy, Portugal, Slovenia and Finland, as being exposed to high medium-

term fiscal sustainability risks, mainly on account of their elevated government debt 
levels and/or high implicit liabilities. The report shows that addressing the identified 

risks requires full implementation of the adjustment requirements as prescribed 
by the SGP. Against this background, the ECOFIN Council conclusions adopted 

on 8 March 20164 underlined the need for Member States to ensure sustainable fiscal positions and to adhere to the EU fiscal rules. Moreover, countries are 

well advised to use the windfall profits resulting from the current low interest rate 
environment for building up buffers and resilience for future shocks. 
For a more effective and lasting contribution to economic growth in the medium term, countries should direct their policy action towards well-tailored 
public investment spending, while keeping in mind the fiscal space available. Although the quantification of the macroeconomic effects is prone to high uncertainty,  

public investment can be expected to have positive demand effects and raise 

potential output by increasing the stock of public capital (see also the article on 
ﬁPublic investment in Europeﬂ in this issue of the Economic Bulletin).While the current aggregate euro area fiscal stance can be considered as appropriate, it hides large differences across individual Member States, with increasing risks of non-compliance with the SGP in some countries without fiscal space. Governments need to strike a balance in their fiscal policy stance 
between reducing high debt levels and not impairing the recovery, while fully 

meeting the SGP requirements. It is welcome that countries with fiscal space
 Œ such 3 See Fiscal Sustainability Report 2015
, European Commission (http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/eeip/pdf/ip018_en.pdf).4 See http://www.consilium.europa.eu/press-releases-pdf/2016/3/40802209647_
en_635930313600000000.pdf32as Germany which needs to accommodate the sizeable budgetary impact of the refugee influx Œ use it. In turn, countries without fiscal space should continue to 
implement the measures necessary to ensure full compliance with the SGP, thereby 

addressing debt sustainability risks and increasing resilience to future shocks. In 
its statement on 7 March 20165 the Eurogroup reiterated that there were increased risks that the 2016 budgets in some countries did not comply with the obligations under the SGP and that previous commitments had yet to be translated into concrete action. Compared with the review of draft budgetary plans carried out in 
November 2015, the number of countries assessed to be at risk of non-compliance has further increased. Besides the four euro area countries which were already 
identified in November as being at risk of non-compliance (i.e. Italy, Spain, Austria 
and Lithuania), the Eurogroup now also sees risks of non-compliance for Portugal, 
based on its new draft budgetary plan, as well as for Belgium and Slovenia, following 
a worsened risk assessment for both countries compared with November. Moreover, 

for six countries (France, the Netherlands, Latvia, Malta, Finland and Ireland) at 
least some risks of deviation from SGP requirements have been identified. While 

France is expected to meet its headline deficit targets in 2015 and 2016, there are substantial shortfalls in the structural effort for the period up to the 2017 excessive deficit procedure (EDP) deadline, putting the timely correction of the excessive 
deficit at risk. While the Netherlands is assessed to be compliant with the 
expenditure benchmark, the structural deficit is expected to worsen considerably 
over the 2015-16 period, resulting in a deviation from the medium-term objective (MTO) by 1.1 percentage points.6 Overall, it is essential that the early warning and corrective instruments introduced in the reinforced fiscal framework are fully and 
consistently implemented. A brief overview is given below for those seven euro area countries that have been assessed as being at risk of non-compliance with the SGP. The focus is on their expected fiscal position, follow-up actions taken since 
November 2015 and, where relevant, commitments made in March in the Eurogroup statement to reduce the consolidation shortfalls. Starting with the countries under the corrective arm, the Eurogroup reiterated in March its call on Spain to implement additional measures to ensure the correction 
of its excessive deficit in 2016. This reflects the lack of any substantial action since November. According to the Commission™s winter forecast, Spain would not fulfil its 

commitments under the EDP. The
 2016 EDP headline deficit target is forecast to be missed by 0.8% of GDP and the structural effort is estimated to have fallen short 
of the required effort by a very large margin over the
 2013-16 EDP period. In this context, the Commission issued an autonomous recommendation on 9 March 2016, indicating that it will reassess in the spring, based on data validated by Eurostat to 
be published in April, whether to step up the EDP. 
Portugal is not projected to have corrected its excessive deficit by the 2015 deadline. According to the Commission™s winter forecast, the headline deficit is forecast 5 See http://www.consilium.europa.eu/press-releases-pdf/2016/3/40802209632_
en_635929785000000000.pdf6 The Commission assessed the 2016 budgets of four countries to be fully compliant with the SGP 

(Germany, Estonia, Luxembourg and Slovakia). 33to have reached 4.2% of GDP in
 2015, including sizeable fiscal costs related to the resolution of a bank. Given large shortfalls in the structural effort, there is no 
evidence of effective action, which would be the prerequisite for extending the EDP deadline without stepping up the procedure. The Commission will reassess 

the situation with respect to the EDP in the spring, based on the Eurostat-

validated budgetary outcomes for 2015. Moreover, the Commission in its opinion dated 5 February 2016 assessed the draft budgetary plan for 2016, which the Portuguese authorities submitted in January and amended on 5 February, as being at risk of non-compliance with the SGP. In its statements on
 11 February and 7 March the Eurogroup called on the Portuguese authorities to prepare additional measures to be implemented when needed to ensure that the
 2016 budget will be compliant with the SGP. Turning to the countries under the preventive arm, for Italy the Commission™s 

winter forecast points to a gap of 0.8 percentage point of GDP in 2016 vis-à-vis the required adjustment path towards the MTO. This gap is larger than projected in 
autumn 2015, reflecting additional spending in the 2016 Stability Law that increased the deficit target by 0.2 percentage point to 2.4% of GDP. On the basis of currently available information, there would be a risk of significant deviation from requirements 
under the preventive arm in 2016 even if Italy were to be granted additional flexibility in the spring. Italy is also projected to be non-compliant with the debt 
rule in 2015 and 2016. Against this background, the Eurogroup repeated its call to implement the necessary measures to ensure that the 2016 budget will be compliant with the rules of the SGP. On 9 March the Commission notified the Italian authorities of its concerns and indicated that it will assess in the spring whether there is a need 
to open a debt-based EDP.
Belgium is also projected to be non-compliant with the debt rule in 2015 and 2016 based on the Commission™s winter forecast. In view of this, the Eurogroup urged the authorities in its March statement to adopt the necessary structural measures to ensure full compliance with the SGP, which the Commission reiterated in its letter 

of 9 March to the Belgian authorities. The Commission will assess in the spring whether there is a need to open a debt-based EDP.The other three countries under the preventive arm, assessed by the Eurogroup in 
March as being at risk of non-compliance with the SGP, are Slovenia, Austria and 

Lithuania. For Slovenia, based on the Commission™s winter forecast, the excessive 

deficit is projected to have been sustainably corrected by the 2015 deadline, while the structural effort projected for 2016 falls short of preventive arm requirements. For Austria the structural balance is projected to deviate by more than 0.5% of GDP from the MTO in
 2016, although the deviation could be assessed as not being significant after accounting for refugee-related costs. Lithuania is projected to deviate 
significantly from the requirements of the preventive arm™s expenditure benchmark. 34Box 1 The slowdown in US labour productivity 
growth Œ stylised facts and economic 
implicationsThe long-term growth prospects of the US economy are important from a euro 
area economic perspective as the United States is a major engine of global 

activity: US labour productivity growth Œ a key driver of long-term growth 

prospects Œ has been surprisingly weak in recent years. This development has also 

been observed in many advanced and emerging market economies.1 Understanding the 
reasons for the recent slowdown is thus important for assessing the growth outlook for 

the United States and, in turn, the euro area economy.
Stylised facts and possible explanationsHistorically, US labour productivity growth (defined 

as output per hour worked) in the business sector 
has varied greatly (see Chart A). Strong growth rates (of 3.3%) in the period 1949-1973 were followed by a sharp slowdown (to 1.6%) in the two decades 
that followed. The information and communication technology (ICT) boom of the period 1996-2003 led 
to the ﬁproductivity miracleﬂ, when labour productivity 
growth doubled. As the gains from the ICT boom had 

largely been reaped, productivity growth slowed down 
to 1.9% in the pre-crisis years (2004-07). While the 
Great Recession led to a cyclical rebound in 2008-10, 
this was followed by disappointing labour productivity 
growth. Since 2011 US labour productivity has grown 

on average by only 0.5% per year, compared with a 

long-term growth rate of 2.5%. A decomposition2 of US labour productivity growth suggests that most of the slowdown can 1 See The future of productivity, OECD, 2015, and Productivity Brief 2015, The Conference Board, 2015.2 According to neoclassical growth accounting, labour productivity growth can be decomposed into 
contributions of capital deepening, labour quality and TFP. Capital deepening is defined as capital 
services derived from the stock of physical assets and intellectual property assets, divided by hours 
worked. Labour quality (or composition) measures the effect of shifts in the age, education and gender 
composition of the workforce on the efficiency of hours worked. TFP growth is measured as a Solow 
residual and captures the increase in efficiency (in particular the increase in the efficiency and intensity 
of the inputs utilised in production) which is due to other factors such as new technologies, more 
efficient business processes and organisational improvements.Chart ADecomposition of labour productivity growth(percentage point contributions to average annual percentage changes)-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
1949-731974-951996-032004-072008-102011-14
labour productivity
capital deepening
labour quality change
total factor productivity
Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics.
35be explained by a decline in the contribution of capital deepening and, to a lesser extent, slower total factor productivity (TFP) growth. TFP growth was 
already slowing before the global financial crisis in 2008, in part due to the waning of 
the earlier ICT-induced TFP growth surge
3, but the slowdown was reinforced by the recession that followed. The contribution of capital deepening, by contrast, initially 

increased during the recession as the large drop in total hours worked led to a sharp 
rise in the amount of capital per hour. This was followed by a pronounced decline 

into negative territory over the period 2011-14. In recent years, the contribution of 

labour quality, the third component of labour productivity, has increased compared 

with past decades, perhaps as the recession hit low-skilled workers hardest, thus 
raising the aggregate efficiency of those that remained employed. 
Capital deepening has been growing at its weakest rate in over 60 years, largely due to the combination of a sharp slowdown and subsequent weak 
recovery in business investment, and the cyclical recovery in hours worked. The decline in the rate of capital accumulation seems to be mostly explained by 
the subdued outlook for economic activity and by uncertainty about whether growth 
will make a sustained return to pre-recession levels. In addition, mismeasurement 
(mostly of ICT deflators) could also partly account for the weak investment 

performance during the recent expansion, leading to underestimates of real GDP 

and labour productivity growth.4TFP growth is determined by a multitude of factors. 
These include the resources spent on innovation; how innovation is transmitted to and commercialised in the rest 
of the economy; the dynamism of firms and the labour market, which governs how 
quickly innovations are adopted, how long inefficient firms survive and how easily 

labour moves to its most productive use; and possible misallocations of resources 
via excessive asset and credit booms. The slowdown in TFP growth could be linked to reduced business dynamism, 
which may have lowered the speed and extent of the transmission of 
innovation within the economy. 
As spending on research and development and 
the number of patent applications have held up well in recent years, a decline in the 
resources spent on innovation is unlikely to be one of the main explanations for the 
slowdown in TFP growth. This is corroborated by a growing number of technological 

advances in scientific fields such as robotics and 3D printing. By contrast, while the 
US economy is known for its dynamism Œ both in terms of how easily firms can start 
up and close down, and as regards labour market flexibility Œ there is some evidence 
that this dynamism has receded in recent years. In particular, the rate of new 

business creation declined sharply during the last recession and has not recovered 3 See Fernald, J., ﬁProductivity and Potential Output before, during and after the Great Recessionﬂ, 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper Series, No 2012-18, 2012.4 Key reasons for potential mismeasurement include a shift in computer investment from domestically 

produced goods to imported goods, together with less effective efforts to account for rising product 
quality in imports, as well as the effect of a change in the pricing strategy for microprocessor units 
by Intel, which led to biases in the matched model methodology. See Byrne, D. and Pinto, E., ﬁThe 
recent slowdown in high-tech equipment price declines and some implications for business investment 
and labor productivityﬂ, FEDS Notes, 2015 and Hatzius, J. and Dawsey, K., ﬁDoing the Sums on Productivity Paradox 2.0.ﬂ Goldman Sachs US Economics Analyst, Issue 15/30, 2015.36since (see Chart B), which could be linked in part to more restrictive credit conditions for small firms and 
less appetite for risk-taking. The rate of firm failures and 

bankruptcies has also declined. Lower rates of business 

creation and death may signal that resources are being 
hindered from moving to their most productive use. In addition, the excessive build-up of household debt during the housing boom prior to the financial 
crisis may have weighed on TFP growth in the 

recovery owing to a misallocation of resources. Household debt was excessive in the United States for 
much of the period after 2003, leading to a prolonged 
period of household deleveraging.5 During this time of excessive household debt, the housing sector may 
have drawn in excessive resources and lowered TFP 

growth. Implications for potential output and wage growthAlthough forecasters have successively revised down their estimates of labour productivity growth ten years ahead, the estimates stand above the 
current very low levels, suggesting some rebound. The median long-term real GDP and labour productivity growth forecasts 

by the Survey of Professional Forecasters have 
been revised downwards since 2004, with the latest 
estimates standing at 2.3% and 1.4% respectively 
(see Chart C), compared with the 0.5% growth rate of actual labour productivity since 2011. This is consistent 
with the interpretation that, while some aspects of the 
productivity growth slowdown, such as firm dynamism, 
could prove somewhat persistent and recover only 
gradually, cyclical factors, particularly in relation to 

capital investment, are expected to unwind more 
quickly. 
In line with the expected slower productivity growth compared with historical averages, real wages may 
also grow somewhat more slowly than in the past. Over the long term, if there are no shifts in the labour 
share, real wages are expected to grow broadly in line 
with labour productivity growth.6 Across US industries, 
5 See Albuquerque, B., Baumann, U. and Krustev, G., ﬁUS household deleveraging following the Great 
Recession Œ a model-based estimate of equilibrium debtﬂ, The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics Vol. 15, Issue 1, 2014.6 See also Barro, L. and Faberman, J., ﬁWage Growth, Inflation and the Labor Shareﬂ, Chicago Fed 

Letter, No 349, 2015.Chart BEconomic dynamism as measured by business birth and death rates(percentages of the average number of establishments in the previous and current year; four-year moving average)2.4
2.6
2.8

3.0
3.2
3.4

3.6
19931996199920022005200820112014
new firm creation
firm deaths
Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics.Chart CMedian forecasts of labour productivity growth and real GDP ten years ahead
(annual percentage changes)1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
199219951998200120042007201020132016
labour productivity
real GDP
Source: Survey of Professional Forecasters, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.37a positive correlation between the change in real wages per employee and average labour productivity growth is 
evident in the period 1999-2014 (see Chart D), with real wages growing in most industries at a slower or similar 
rate to that of labour productivity. In the most recent period (2011-14), both real wage and labour productivity 

growth have been subdued. Chart DReal wage and productivity growth across industries(annual percentage changes; period average: 1999-2014)-5
-4
-3

-2

-1
012
3
45-2-10123456
Productivity
Wages
Sources: US Bureau of Economic Analysis and ECB calculations.


38Box 2  Current oil price trendsOil prices have fallen by 70% since July 2014. Taking a longer-term perspective, the oil price drop 
can be explained by previous large investments and 
technological innovations that caused oil production 
to surge at a time of weakening growth. Technological 
breakthroughs sparked the shale oil revolution in the 
United States, and several years of high oil prices, 
against a backdrop of strong growth in emerging market 
economies, encouraged large-scale investment in oil. 
Owing to a considerable lag between investment and 
production, the resulting supply entered the market 
when demand for oil was no longer increasing. Although 

shale oil supply started increasing and global demand 
growth started slowing as early as 2010 (e.g. in China), 
supply disruptions in major oil-producing countries 
(Libya, Iran, Russia and Iraq) linked to geopolitical 
tensions supported oil prices for several years before 
they fell abruptly in the summer of 2014. The strategic 

decision of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC) not to offset the price decline with a 

cut in production, taken at its November 2014 meeting, 
caused prices to drop further.
While both demand and supply factors have driven 
the fall in oil prices since 2014, model-based results 

show that the initial decline can mostly be explained 

by supply increases. More recently, however, demand 

has been the dominant factor (see Chart A). According 

to staff calculations, around 60% of the 2014 decline 

was driven by supply factors. After a rebound in the 

first two quarters of 2015, oil prices dropped again, 

with demand factors playing an increasing role. This 

is largely a reflection of the slowdown in aggregate 

demand, while lower price expectations linked to growth 

in emerging markets and OPEC™s decision not to cut 

supply (as captured by the precautionary demand shock) 

also contributed to the recent decline. OPEC supply 

has trended upwards since mid-2014, while oil demand 

from non-OECD countries remained strong during 2015. 

Oil demand from OECD countries declined at the end 

of 2015, mainly owing to mild winter conditions in the 

United States and Europe as well as weaker economic 

sentiment in large emerging market economies 

(see Chart B).Chart AModel-based oil price breakdown(left-hand scale: cumulated contributions of the different oil shocks in percentage 
points, July 2014 = 0; right-hand scale: nominal oil prices in USD per barrel)30
40
50
60

70

80
90
100
110
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40

-20
020
Q3 2014Q4 2014Q1 2015Q2 2015Q3 2015Q4 2015Q1 2016
oil supply
global aggregate demand
precautionary oil demand
oil price 
Source: ECB staff calculations.
Notes: The latest observation is for January 2016. The historical breakdowns have been 

normalised to start at zero in July 2014, when Brent crude oil prices started dropping. A 

and vice versa. The ﬁoil supply shockﬂ captures exogenous changes in oil production, the 

ﬁglobal aggregate demand shockﬂ captures changes in oil prices that are endogenously 

caused by global economic growth developments and the ﬁprecautionary oil demand 

shockﬂ captures changes in expectations about the oil demand/supply balance in the 



Murphy, D.P., ﬁThe role of inventories and speculative trading in the global market for 

crude oilﬂ, Journal of Applied Econometrics
, 29(3), 2004, pp. 454-78, using data on oil 

prices, global economic growth developments and the ﬁprecautionary oil demand shockﬂ 

captures changes in expectations about the oil demand/supply balance in the future as 


ﬁThe role of inventories and speculative trading in the global market for crude oilﬂ, Journal 
of Applied Econometrics, 29(3), 2004, pp. 454-78, using data on oil prices, global oil 

production and a proxy for global oil inventories and global economic activity.
Chart BWorld oil supply and demand
(million barrels per day; year-on-year changes)-1
-0.5
00.5
11.5
22.5
3Q3 2014Q4 2014Q1 2015Q2 2015Q3 2015Q4 2015
OPEC supply
non-OPEC supply
non-OECD demand
OECD demand 
Source: International Energy Agency.
39It will take time before the current oversupply can be absorbed. The arrival of US shale oil and unconventional oil exploration more generally is a 
structural supply-side shift which might cause oil prices 
to stay lower for longer. An excess supply of almost 

1.4 million barrels per day on average over 2014-15 has 
caused OECD crude oil inventories to reach historical 
highs (see Chart C).1 A rebalancing is nevertheless expected to occur 
over time. A theoretical lower bound for oil prices is 
linked to the level of the marginal cost of production of 

US shale oil, estimated at around USD 35 per barrel 

on average.2 However, several types of oil production, such as 

US shale oil, have continued to grow over the past 

year despite oil prices being below their respective 

estimated marginal costs. Indeed, several other 

factors besides these production-specific marginal 
costs play a role. First, marginal costs differ markedly depending on the type of 

oil and the specific oilfield, making these averages only a rough indicator of when 

production would be affected. Second, it is important to take into account cost 

deflation3 and increased production efficiency, i.e. marginal costs may decline 
owing to productivity progress. However, there is already evidence that the number 

of oil rigs has declined in the United States, indicating lower supply over time.4 The current futures curve indicates that oil prices are expected to stay 

within a range of USD 30-45 per barrel over the next two years. Relative to 

that projection, the downside risks to oil prices on the supply side are related to 

further increases in global oil production owing to a stronger than expected return 

of Iranian oil and the continued resilience of non-OPEC production, in particular 

US shale oil. On the demand side, a stronger than expected slowdown in emerging 

economies might affect oil demand negatively. The main upside risks are stronger 

than expected cutbacks in oil production owing to geopolitical tensions and larger 

supply fall-backs if oil prices remain persistently low. From 2017 onwards, although 

the main downside risks still prevail, the risks are increasingly on the upside, as 

high capital expenditure cutbacks might result in a faster tightening of the supply/
demand balance than currently reflected in the futures curve once global economic 

activity picks up.1 Average global oil demand in 2014-15 was around 93.6 million barrels per day and average global oil 
supply 95 million barrels per day. Excess supply amounted to about 1.5% of daily global oil demand.2 Little, Arthur D., Where now for oil?, Viewpoint, 2015.3 Cost deflation is a general decline in the cost of oil production which, for example, can originate from 

production efficiency gains or lower service costs (e.g. reduced service fees for contractors to drill oil 
wells or for support activities such as surveying, cementing, casing and treating wells). 4 Baker Hughes, 2016 (http://phx.corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=79687&p=irol-rigcountsoverview)
.Chart CDemand, supply and oil inventories(left-hand scale: global oil demand and supply in million barrels per day Œ flow variable; right-hand scale: OECD crude oil inventories in million barrels Œ stock variable)750
800
850
900

950
1,000
1,050
1,100
1,150
1,200
60
65
70

75

80
85
90
95
100
19861990199419982002200620102014
global oil demand 
global oil supply 
OECD crude oil inventories 
Source: International Energy Agency.
Note: Annual data; the latest observation is for 2015.
40Box 3 Liquidity conditions and monetary policy 
operations in the period from  

28 October 2015 to 26 January 2016This box describes the ECB™s monetary policy operations during the seventh 
and eighth reserve maintenance periods in 2015, which ran from 28 October to 8 December 2015 and from 9 December 2015 to 26 January 2016 respectively. During this period the interest rates on the main refinancing operations (MROs) and 
the marginal lending facility were left unchanged at 0.05% and 0.30% respectively. 

Instead, the interest rate on the deposit facility was lowered by 10 basis points from 
-0.20% to -0.30% as of 9 December 2015.1 On 16 December the sixth targeted longer-term refinancing operation (TLTRO) 
was settled for an amount of •18.3 billion, 
compared with •15.5 billion in the previous TLTRO in September. This brought 

the total allotted amount in the first six TLTROs to •417.9 billion.
2 In addition, the Eurosystem continued to buy public sector securities, covered bonds and asset-
backed securities as part of its asset purchase programme (APP), with a targeted 
purchase amount of •60 billion per month. In December 2015 the Governing Council 
decided to extend the APP horizon: the monthly purchases are now intended to 

run until the end of March 2017 or until there is a sustained adjustment in the path 
of inflation towards the medium-term objective of inflation below, but close to, 2%. 

Furthermore, the Governing Council decided to reinvest for as long as is necessary 
the principal repayments of securities purchased within the APP.
3Liquidity needsIn the period under review, the average daily liquidity needs of the banking 

system, defined as the sum of autonomous factors and reserve requirements, 
stood at •706.5 billion, an increase of •60.1 billion compared with the 
previous review period (i.e. the fifth and sixth maintenance periods of the 
year). The greater liquidity need is almost exclusively attributable to an increase in 

average autonomous factors, which rose by •59.9 billion to stand at •593.3 billion 
(see the table).1 MROs continued to be conducted as fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment. The same 
procedure remained in use for the three-month longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs). The 
interest rate in each LTRO was fixed at the average of the rates on the MROs over the relevant LTRO™s 
lifetime. TLTROs continued to be conducted as fixed-rate tender procedures, with an interest rate equal 
to the MRO rate.2 For information on the amounts allotted in TLTROs, see similar boxes in previous issues of the 

Economic Bulletin, as well as on the ECB™s website: www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/implement/omo/html/index.en.html3 Detailed information on the expanded APP is available on the ECB™s website: 
www.ecb.europa.eu/
mopo/implement/omt/html/index.en.html41The increase in average autonomous factors was mainly a result of increases in average liquidity-absorbing factors Œ banknotes in circulation, government 
deposits and other autonomous factors. Other autonomous factors averaged •563 billion, up •20.5 billion from the previous review period, mainly reflecting an increase in quarterly revaluation accounts. Banknotes in circulation rose over the 
winter holiday period in particular, thereby following their usual seasonal pattern. Banknotes averaged •1,065.3 billion, up •11.4 billion compared with the previous 

review period. In addition, average government deposits also contributed to 
the increase in liquidity needs, increasing on average by •8.3 billion to stand at 
•87.6 billion. The small increase in government deposits shows that, while some 

treasuries are prepared to accept lower rates in the market, most continue to have 
few alternatives when placing cash in the market. The further reduction in the 

deposit facility rate to -0.30% increased treasuries™ cost of placing deposits with the 

Eurosystem. On the other hand, higher levels of excess liquidity tend to bring money 
market rates even closer to the rate of the deposit facility.
Liquidity-providing factors declined over the period on the back of lower net foreign assets and lower net assets denominated in euro. The decline in net 
foreign assets by •11.4 billion was chiefly a result of a quarter-end devaluation 

effect from the third and fourth quarters of 2015. This devaluation of net foreign 

assets was mainly driven by a decline in the US dollar value of gold which was 
only partially offset by a depreciation of the euro in the fourth quarter. In addition, 

net assets denominated in euro averaged •511.0 billion, down •8.3 billion from the 

previous review period. Net assets denominated in euro declined on account of a 
fall in financial assets held by the Eurosystem for purposes other than monetary 
policy, together with a small increase in liabilities held by foreign institutions with 

the national central banks. Foreign institutions increased their holdings, despite 
the further cut to the deposit facility rate, which increases the cost of depositing at 
national central banks. The increase may be due to there being fewer opportunities 

to find attractive alternatives in the market. The volatility of autonomous factors remained elevated during the period under review.
 Such volatility primarily reflected strong fluctuations in government 
deposits and the quarterly revaluation of net foreign assets and net assets 
denominated in euro. The volatility remained broadly unchanged from the previous 

review period, while the level of autonomous factors continued its upward trend.The average absolute error in weekly forecasts of autonomous factors increased 
by •0.8 billion to •7.2 billion in the period under review and was mainly due 
to forecasting errors for government deposits. With increasing levels of excess 

liquidity, and in the presence of increasingly negative short-term money market rates, it 

became more difficult to anticipate the investment activities of treasuries.
Liquidity provided through monetary policy instrumentsThe average amount of liquidity provided through open market operations Œ i.e. tender operations and outright asset purchases Œ increased by 42•176.5 billion to stand at •1,306.9 billion (see the chart). This increase was exclusively due to the outright 
monetary policy purchases, mainly from the public sector purchase programme, while tender operations 
remained broadly unchanged during the review period.Average liquidity provided through tender operations declined by •0.9 billion during the 
period under review to stand at •532.5 billion. An increase of average liquidity provided by the TLTROs was more than offset by a decline in regular operations. More specifically, the MROs and 
the three-month LTROs decreased by •2.2 billion and 

•18.3 billion respectively. The outstanding amount of 

TLTROs increased by •19.6 billion over the review 

period, with the largest increase taking place in the 
eighth maintenance period, reflecting the TLTRO 

allotment in December 2015.Average liquidity provided through outright portfolios increased by  
•177.4 billion to stand at •774.4 billion, mainly on account of the public sector 
purchase programme. The average liquidity provided by the public sector purchase 
programme, the third covered bond purchase programme and the asset-backed 
securities purchase programme rose by •156.5 billion, •25.2 billion and •3.3 billion respectively. The redemption of bonds held under the securities markets programme 
and the previous two covered bond purchase programmes amounted to •7.8 billion.Excess liquidityAs a result of the aforementioned increase in liquidity, average excess liquidity 
rose by •116.4 billion to stand at •600.3 billion in the period under review 
 (see the chart). Most of the liquidity increase was recorded in the eighth 
maintenance period, when average excess liquidity rose by •86.5 billion on account 
of continuous purchases and only slightly higher autonomous factors. In the seventh 
maintenance period, average excess liquidity rose less sharply, increasing by  

•49.0 billion. This relatively small increase was mainly driven by the rise in 

autonomous factors, which partially absorbed the increase in the APP.
The rise in excess liquidity was mostly reflected in higher average current account holdings, which increased by •81.0 billion to stand at •527.9 billion 
in the period under review. 
This increase was less pronounced for the seventh 
maintenance period, with an average of •28.5 billion compared with •63.3 billion 
in the eighth maintenance period. Average recourse to the deposit facility also 

increased, albeit to a lesser extent (by •35.3 billion), to stand at •185.7 billion.ChartEvolution of monetary policy instruments and excess liquidity(EUR billions)Source: ECB.43Interest rate developmentsIn the review period, money market rates decreased further on the back of the cut in the deposit facility rate to -0.30%. In the unsecured market, EONIA 
averaged -0.184%, down from an average of -0.130% in the previous review 
period. While EONIA was almost flat in the seventh maintenance period, the cut 

in the deposit facility rate of 0.10 percentage point with effect from the eighth 

maintenance period fed through almost one to one into EONIA, which declined by 
0.091 percentage point. In the context of the continued increase in excess liquidity, 

the pass-through to market rates was smooth. Furthermore, secured overnight rates 
declined in line with the deposit facility rate to levels even closer to the deposit facility Table
Eurosystem liquidity situation28 October 2015 to 26 January 201622 July to 27 October 20158th Maintenance Period7th Maintenance Period
Liabilities Œ liquidity needs (averages; EUR billions)Autonomous liquidity factors1,715.8(+40.1)
1,675.71,720.1
(+9.3)1,710.8(+18.0)
Banknotes in circulation1,065.3(+11.4)
1,053.91,072.8(+16.3)1,056.5
(+4.1)Government deposits87.6(+8.3)
79.382.5(-11.1) 
93.5(-1.6) Other autonomous factors563.0(+20.5)
542.5564.8(+4.0)560.8(+15.6)
Monetary policy instrumentsCurrent accounts527.9(+81.0)
446.9557.1(+63.3)
493.8(+28.5)
Minimum reserve requirements113.2(+0.2)
113.0
113.3
(+0.2)113.1
(-0.2) Deposit facility185.7(+35.3)
150.4196.6(+23.5)
173.1(+20.3)

0.0(+0.0)
0.00.0(+0.0)0.0(+0.0)Assets Œ liquidity supply (averages; EUR billions)Autonomous liquidity factors1,122.9(-19.6) 
1,142.51,123.7
(+1.9)1,121.9(-13.9) 
Net foreign assets611.9(-11.4) 
623.2611.6
(-0.6) 612.2(-6.9) Net assets denominated in euro511.0(-8.3)
519.3512.1(+2.5)509.7(-7.0)Monetary policy instruments
Open market operations1,306.9(+176.5)
1,130.41,350.3(+94.2)1,256.1(+80.6)
Tender operations
532.5(-0.9) 
533.4538.5(+13.1)
525.4(-6.9) MROs69.1(-2.2) 
71.371.6(+5.5)66.1(-4.1)Three-month LTROs
55.3(-18.3)
73.651.6(-8.0)59.7(-9.5)TLTROs
408.1(+19.6)
388.5415.3(+15.7)
399.6(+6.7)Outright portfolios774.4(+177.4)
597.0811.8(+81.0)
730.7(+87.6)
First covered bond purchase programme20.6(-1.6) 
22.220.5(-0.3)20.8(-1.1)Second covered bond purchase programme9.8(-0.8) 
10.59.6(-0.3)9.9(-0.4)Third covered bond purchase programme140.2(+25.2)
114.9
144.4(+9.2)135.2(+12.9)
Securities markets programme123.1(-5.4) 
128.5122.9(-0.5)123.3(-3.8)Asset-backed securities purchase programme15.2(+3.3)
11.9
15.5(+0.5)15.0(+1.8)Public sector purchase programme465.5(+156.5)
308.9498.8(+72.3)
426.5(+78.3)
Marginal lending facility0.1(-0.2)
0.40.2(+0.1)0.1(-0.0)Other liquidity-based information (averages; EUR billions)Aggregate liquidity needs706.5(+60.1)
646.5710.1(+7.7)702.4(+31.7)
Autonomous factors*593.3(+59.9)
533.5596.8(+7.5)589.3(+31.8)
Excess liquidity600.3(+116.4)
483.9640.2(+86.5)
553.7(+49.0)
Interest rate developments (percentages)MROs0.05(+0.00)
0.050.05(+0.00)
0.05(+0.00)
Marginal lending facility0.30(+0.00)
0.300.30(+0.00)
0.30(+0.00)
Deposit facility-0.25(-0.05) 
-0.20-0.30(-0.10) 
-0.20(+0.00)
EONIA average-0.184(-0.055)
-0.130-0.227(-0.091)-0.135(+0.003)
Source: ECB. * The overall value of the autonomous factors also includes the ﬁItems in course of settlementﬂ.




44rate. Average overnight repo rates in the GC Pooling market
4 declined to -0.246% and -0.238% for the standard and extended collateral baskets respectively, down 
0.059 percentage point and 0.055 percentage point compared with the previous 
review period.4 The GC Pooling market allows repurchase agreements to be traded on the Eurex platform against 
standardised baskets of collateral.45Box 4 Factors behind the comparatively strong 
activity in euro area servicesThe services sector has been a driving force behind the ongoing recovery in the euro area since the first quarter of 2013, raising the question as to which 
factors in particular have been behind the comparatively strong activity in 
services.1 The total services sector (market as well as non-market) accounts for 
about three-quarters of total value added in the euro area. Total services value 

added in volume terms has grown steadily since the trough in the first quarter of 
2013 and has recorded all-time highs (see Chart A). Market services have accounted 

for almost 90% of the total growth in euro area services value added since the first 
quarter of 2013. In 2015, by contrast, euro area value added in industry (including 
construction) was still almost 10% below its peak at the beginning of 2008  

(see Chart B). Looking at the largest euro area countries, a similar picture emerges, 
the main exceptions being comparatively weak total services value added in Italy 
and all-time highs for German industrial value added in recent quarters.The European Commission™s quarterly business survey of the euro area 
services sector gives an insight into the factors that are stimulating or 
hampering market services activity.
 The survey contains the question ﬁWhat main 

factors are currently limiting your business?ﬂ and offers respondents the choice 
1 For a more detailed description of euro area developments across sectors, see the article entitled ﬁEuro 
area sectoral activity since 2008ﬂ in the May 2014 issue of the Monthly Bulletin.Chart ATotal services value added in the euro area and 
the four largest euro area countries(Q1 2008=100; calendar and seasonally adjusted chain-linked volumes)70
75
80

85

90
95
100
105

110
200720082009201020112012201320142015
euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Source: Eurostat.Chart BIndustry value added in the euro area and the four largest euro area countries(Q1 2008=100; calendar and seasonally adjusted chain-linked volumes)70
75
80

85

90
95
100
105

110
200720082009201020112012201320142015
euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Source: Eurostat.46of ﬁnoneﬂ, ﬁinsufficient demandﬂ, ﬁshortage of labour 
forceﬂ, ﬁshortage of space and/or equipmentﬂ, ﬁfinancial 
constraintsﬂ and ﬁother factorsﬂ, with respondents being 
asked to select however many that apply to them. The 

factors are reported as a percentage of the total number 
of respondents.Even though it has increased, demand remains the main factor reported by euro area market services 
firms as hampering business, while an easing in 
financial constraints is also apparent compared with the same time last year. 
In the ongoing recovery, 

almost half of all services firms report no constraints 
on business, as suggested by the indicator on the 
absence of factors that limit business, which stood at 
45% in January 2016 (see Chart C). Even so, it has 
increased steadily since the fourth quarter of 2012. 
This finding mirrors developments in the capacity 
utilisation rate in the services industries, which has also 
increased steadily since the fourth quarter of 2012. In 
January 2016 the ﬁinsufficient demandﬂ indicator was reported by a third of the companies that responded. A lack of demand thus remains 

the single most important impediment to market services business, although it has 
been declining in importance for the last year. The categories ﬁnoneﬂ and ﬁinsufficient 

demandﬂ were by far the two most frequently reported by services companies (as is 
usually the case, and also holds for manufacturing and construction firms). The third 

largest response in January this year, with 20%, was for the category ﬁother factorsﬂ, 

which was reported more frequently than in the recession of 2011-13. Services 

firms have benefited from improving financial conditions, as 12% of services 
reported in January that ﬁfinancial constraintsﬂ were a factor limiting their business, compared with 16% a year ago. This improvement of 

4 percentage points was of a similar magnitude to the 
improvement in the demand indicator over the same 
period. To complete the picture, ﬁshortage of labourﬂ 

was mentioned by 10% of services firms, whereas the 
factor ﬁshortage of space and/or equipmentﬂ was only 
reported by around 2%. The limits to services business for the euro area as a whole that were reported mask marked 
differences at the country level. Among the four 
largest euro area countries, ﬁinsufficient demandﬂ is 

playing a very limited role in Germany, but a more 

significant one in the other three countries, where 
around half of the services firms reported a lack of 
demand (see Chart D). ﬁFinancial constraintsﬂ was 
another factor that was more or less absent in Germany 
in January this year, whereas a quarter of Italian 

services firms reported that financial conditions were Chart CFactors limiting services business in the euro area(percentages of total respondents)020
40
60
80
100
120
140
2003200520072009201120132015
none
insufficient demand
shortage of labour
shortage of space and/or equipment
financial constraints
others
Source: European Commission.

limiting business.Chart DInsufficient demand indicator for services in the euro 
area and the four largest euro area countries(percentages of total respondents)010
20
30
40

50
60
70
80
90
2003200520072009201120132015
euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Source: European Commission.
47continuing to hamper business (see Chart E). ﬁFinancial constraintsﬂ has diminished in importance in Spain since January 2015, when it stood at a similar level to that 
in Italy. In contrast, ﬁshortage of labour forceﬂ was reported to be a factor limiting 

services business for one in five German services firms, whereas this indicator 
remains low in Italy and Spain (see Chart F).There are also marked differences within the services sector at a more disaggregated level. In recent quarters, an absence of factors limiting services business was reported by about half of the firms active 
in warehousing and support activities for transportation, 
real estate activities, and computer programming, 
consultancy and related activities. This suggests that 

these market services industries in particular are 
driving the ongoing recovery. A third of total value 

added growth in euro area services since the first 
quarter of 2013 has indeed come from trade, transport, 
accommodation and food services, and almost a 
quarter from professional, business and support 
services (see Chart G). Real estate and information 
and communication technology services have each 
contributed in double-digit terms to total euro area 
services value added growth since the first quarter of 
2013. In January financial constraints were reported to 
be a particular issue for telecommunication firms (one in 

five firms) and labour shortage for employment activities 
firms (a share of 40%, the highest since records began 
in the third quarter of 2003, with employment activities 
referring to the activities of employment placement firms 
and temporary employment agencies, as well as other 
human resources provision). Chart EFinancial constraints indicator for services in the euro area and the four largest euro area countries(percentages of total respondents)0510

15

20

25
30
35
40
2003200520072009201120132015
euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Source: European Commission.Chart FShortage of labour force indicator for services in the euro area and the four largest euro area countries(percentages of total respondents)0510

15

20

25
2003200520072009201120132015
euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Source: European Commission.Chart GContributions to total services value added growth in the euro area(quarter-on-quarter percentage growth; percentage point contributions)-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
00.5
11.5
200720082009201020112012201320142015
total services value added growth
trade, transport, accommodation and food services
professional, business and support services
real estate
information and communication technology services
arts, entertainment and other services
finance and insurance
non-market services
Source: Eurostat.48Overall, insufficient demand remains the single most important factor holding back services business at the euro area level, but other factors play a role at country and sub-sectoral level. For example, factors limiting services business that 
are reported comparatively often by market services firms are financial constraints in 
Italy and shortage of labour in Germany. 
49Box 5 The impact of the oil price decline on the 

current account surplus of the euro areaThis box describes the impact of the recent decline in oil prices on the current 
account balances of the euro area and individual euro area countries.1 The 
decline in oil prices started gradually in 2012, before accelerating sharply in the 

second half of 2014. Between mid-2014 and the end of 2015 the oil price decreased 

by around 55% in US dollar terms and 45% in euro terms. Since the euro area is a 

net importer of oil, a drop in oil prices amounts to an improvement in the terms of 

trade. Moreover, owing to the relatively price-inelastic nature of oil demand, a decline 

in oil prices is typically associated with improvements in the oil trade balance and the 

current account balance of the euro area. The same applies for the individual euro 

area countries, all of which are currently net importers of oil.2 The direct effect of a 
fall in oil prices on the current account is usually only partly offset by indirect effects, 

such as higher demand for non-oil imports on account of stronger domestic economic 

activity and lower exports of euro area goods and services to oil-exporting countries.The oil trade balance of the euro area has improved 

by almost 1% of GDP since mid-2014. This explains 
the widening of the current account surplus from 

around 2% to just above 3% of GDP (see Chart A). The reduction in the oil bill is broadly in line with the mechanical effect of a decline in oil prices of the 

observed magnitude at unchanged net import volumes. 

Among the other components of the current account, 

the combined income balance improved only slightly 

over this period, while the trade balance excluding oil 

was relatively stable.3 By contrast, the current account 
improvements recorded in previous years mainly 

reflected improvements in the non-oil trade balance 

resulting from the external rebalancing in the euro 

area. Indeed, from a longer-term perspective, the bulk 

of the current account adjustment of around 4.5% of 

GDP since 2008 is explained by increases in euro area 

exports on account of stronger global demand and 

competitiveness gains, as well as Œ during the initial stages Œ a compression of imports.1 For the impact of the oil price decline on inflation and economic activity, see the box entitled ﬁThe 
recent oil price decline and the euro area economic outlookﬂ, Economic Bulletin, Issue 1, ECB, 2015.2 In this box, the oil trade balance corresponds to net trade under Category 33 of the Standard 

International Trade Classification (SITC), i.e. ﬁpetroleum, petroleum products and related materialsﬂ. 
Some countries with oil-refining industries, such as Greece and the Netherlands, simultaneously record 
sizeable gross imports and exports under this category.3 The combined income balance includes primary income (mainly net investment income) and secondary 

income (net transfer payments).Chart ABreakdown of euro area current account balance(percentages of GDP, four-quarter averages, not seasonally-adjusted)
-4
-3
-2
-1
01
234562007
2009
2011
2013
2015
oil trade balance
non-oil trade balance
income
current account
Sources: Eurostat and ECB.Notes: The decomposition of exports and imports into oil and non-oil components is 

based on Eurostat™s external trade statistics. Non-oil trade includes services. The latest 

observation is for the fourth quarter of 2015.50Over the past year euro area non-oil imports picked up and grew slightly faster than non-oil exports (see Chart B). The value of euro area goods and 
services imports excluding oil was boosted by the 
ongoing recovery in domestic demand in the euro area.The recent decline in oil prices also resulted in significant current account improvements in 
many individual euro area countries (see Chart C). 
Between 2014 and 2015 the oil trade deficits shrank for 
all euro area countries in a range between 1.4% of GDP 

in the case of Cyprus and 0.1% of GDP for Lithuania. 

For many euro area countries, the improvement in 
the net oil trade balance was the most important 
factor behind the developments in the current account 
in 2015. Notably, the widening of Germany™s current 
account surplus over this period is also predominantly 
explained by the shrinking of the oil trade deficit.To sum up, the recent oil price decline raised the 
current account surplus of the euro area by almost 1% of GDP. The path implied by futures markets currently points to a gradual increase in oil prices over the coming years.4 If this materialises, the oil-related current account improvements in the euro area could be partly reversed in the 
medium term (see Box 2).4 See the ﬁMarch 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro areaﬂ, available at  
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/projections/html/index.en.htmlChart BBreakdown of euro area imports and exports(percentages of GDP, four-quarter averages, not seasonally-adjusted)
0123
415
20
25
30
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
non-oil exports
oil exports (right-hand scale)
non-oil imports
oil imports (right-hand scale)
Sources: Eurostat and ECB.Notes: The decomposition of exports and imports into oil and non-oil components is 

based on Eurostat™s external trade statistics. Non-oil trade includes services. The latest 

observation is for the fourth quarter of 2015.Chart CBreakdown of changes in goods trade balance and changes in current account balance between 2014 and 2015(percentages of GDP)-3
-2

-1
0123CYIEGRBEEESIDEFILVFREAPTATITLUESNLSKLT
oil trade balance
total goods trade balance
non-oil goods trade balance
current account balance
Sources: Eurostat and ECB.Notes: The goods trade balance is retrieved from Eurostat™s external trade statistics. For euro area countries, the change measured 


quarter of 2015 for euro area countries and the fourth quarter of 2015 for the euro area.51Box 6 Oil prices and euro area consumer  

energy pricesThe major negative impact that energy prices are currently having on headline HICP inflation primarily reflects the effect of changes in the price of oil in euro
 (see Chart A). However, while fairly close, there is no strict one-to-one relationship 
between movements in the price of crude oil and overall consumer energy prices. 
In particular, the co-movement varies in terms of intensity and timing across the 
main energy components.1 Against the backdrop of the 
recent sharp falls in oil prices, this box reviews some 
pertinent factors that can influence the co-movement 
in terms of the degree of automaticity, magnitude and 

timing between oil prices and euro area consumer 
energy prices. Given that these factors can be different 

across energy price sub-components, they are 
assessed separately for liquid fuels, gas and electricity.
Movements in consumer prices for liquid fuels reflect a direct, complete and quick pass-through 
of crude oil prices. This pass-through can typically be measured in terms of a few weeks.2 In the very short term, refining and distribution costs and margins 
tend to slightly buffer movements in crude oil prices, 

but evolve in a more stable and independent fashion 
over longer horizons. For example, petrol, refining and 
distribution costs and margins have increased slightly 
since the second half of 2015, but these movements 
have been swamped by the very large movements in 
crude oil prices (see Chart B). Indirect taxes account for a significant portion of the final consumer price of 
liquid fuels. Excise taxes are fixed in terms of euro cent per litre and have no co-movement with oil prices. Value added taxes are levied as a percentage of the price, including excise taxes, and thus co-move with crude oil 
prices. All in all, the decline in euro area consumer liquid fuel prices by approximately 

25% since July 2014 reflects the more or less complete pass-through of the large 
(more than 60%) decline in crude oil prices in euro terms.31 See the 2010 Structural Issues Report entitled ﬁEnergy markets and the euro area macroeconomyﬂ 
(also published as ECB Occasional Paper Series, No 113). See in particular Section 3.2, entitled ﬁDirect first-round effectsﬂ.2 On average across the euro area, approximately 75% is passed through within three weeks and more 

than 90% within five weeks. See Meyler, A., ﬁThe pass through of oil prices into euro area consumer 
liquid fuel prices in an environment of high and volatile oil pricesﬂ, Energy Economics, Vol. 31, Issue 6, November 2009, pp. 867-881.3 The large share of excise taxes implies that the elasticity of consumer prices with respect to oil prices 

(i.e. the percentage change in the consumer price in response to a given percentage change in the oil 
price) is relatively low/high at low/high levels of oil prices.Chart AOil prices and HICP energy components
(annual percentage changes; percentage point contributions)-75
-50
-25

0
25

50
75
100
-15
-10
-5
0510
15
20
20022004200620082010201220142016
energy HICP
liquid fuels (transport & heating)
gas
electricity
other (solid fuels & heat energy)
oil price (right-hand scale)
Sources: Eurostat, Bloomberg, BIS and ECB calculations.
available).52Consumer gas prices are largely driven by wholesale gas prices, which do not necessarily 
co-move with oil prices. Traditionally in Europe, 
wholesale gas prices, in particular contracted gas 
border prices, were linked by long-term contracts to oil 
prices with a lag of approximately three to six months. 
However, as spot markets have developed in Europe, 

this link has become less prevalent, implying a potential 
weakening of the link between developments in 
consumer gas prices and crude oil prices. The share of 

oil-linked wholesale gas pricing decreased from 80% to 
30% between 2005 and 2014.4 Despite this de-linking, wholesale gas prices have fallen in tandem with crude 
oil prices in recent years (see Chart C). However, this is more a reflection of the supply-demand balance 
for gas in Europe than an automatic link with oil price 
movements.5 Gas network and distribution costs and margins, as well as taxes, drive a wedge between the 
wholesale and consumer prices for gas, as is the case with liquid fuel prices.6 Movements in wholesale gas prices are generally passed through with a short lag of three to six months. The lag in pass-through also means 

that the distribution costs and margins initially tend to fall when wholesale prices are rising and vice versa, but to revert thereafter. Since July 

2014 euro area wholesale gas prices have declined by 
33% and consumer gas prices by approximately 5%.7Consumer electricity prices have little direct linkage 
to developments in oil prices, reflecting the many 
different ways that electricity is produced. The main methods for generating electricity in the euro 
area are the use of fossil fuels, such as gas or coal/
lignite; the exploitation of renewable energy sources, 
such as hydro, solar or wind; and nuclear fission. Oil is rarely used to generate electricity; however, owing to the co-movement of gas with oil, there has been 
some correlation with electricity prices, but this is much 
weaker and with a longer lag than for liquid fuels or for 
gas Œ see Chart D. Furthermore, it is primarily seen 
in countries where gas accounts for a relatively large 4 See the International Gas Union™s Wholesale Gas Price Survey Œ 2015 Edition. See also European Commission, Quarterly Report on European Gas Markets, Volume 8, Issue 3; third quarter of 2015.5 Owing to the costs of shipping gas (requiring liquefaction and regasification facilities), opportunities 
for international arbitrage (e.g. with US gas) are relatively limited and only profitable when price 
differentials are quite large.6 On average in 2014 and 2015, wholesale gas prices accounted for approximately 40% of the consumer 

gas prices, distribution costs and margins made up around 33%, and taxes and levies just over 25%, 
according to ECB staff calculations derived from Eurostat and Haver Analytics data.7 Consumer gas prices have declined across all euro area countries, albeit with some differences in 

magnitude, in part reflecting country-specific regulatory changes.Chart BBreakdown of consumer petrol prices(euro cents per litre)025
50
75
100

125

150
175
20022004200620082010201220142016
final consumer price
refining & distr. costs/margins
excise taxes
VAT
Brent Crude in euro
Sources: BIS, Bloomberg, European Commission Oil Bulletin and ECB calculations.Chart CCrude oil, wholesale gas and consumer gas prices(annual percentage changes)-20
-15
-10
-5
0510
15
20
25
30
35
-100 -75 -50 
-25 0 25 
50 
75 100 
125 
150 
175 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 
crude oil gas border prices gas spot prices HICP gas (right-hand scale) Sources: Eurostat, Bloomberg, BIS, Haver Analytics and ECB calculations.
53portion of the electricity generated. Across the euro 
area on average, in 2014 (the latest year for which 
data are available from Eurostat), almost 40% of the 
electricity price for consumers was accounted for by 
energy and supply costs, around 25% by network costs 
and the remainder Œ approximately 33% Œ by taxes and levies. Since July 2014 consumer electricity prices in 
the euro area have increased (by approximately 1%), but decreased marginally in annual terms at the 
beginning of 2016.Overall, the current negative inflation in consumer energy prices reflects the impact of oil price 
declines, primarily via consumer liquid fuel prices. Consumer prices for liquid (transport and heating) 
fuels Œ which comprise approximately half of the 
energy component Œ have the most direct, strongest 
and quickest link with oil prices. Consumer prices for 
gas and, in particular, for electricity tend to have a less direct and weaker link, and respond with a longer lag. 
Based on oil, gas and electricity prices, as well as on market futures, consumer energy prices Œ not only for liquid fuels but also for gas Œ are likely to continue to have a negative impact on inflation in 2016, whilst consumer 
electricity prices are likely to remain subdued.Chart DCrude oil prices and consumer energy price components(annual percentage changes)-80
-60

-40

-20
0
20
40
60
80
-30
-20

-10
010
20
30
20022004200620082010201220142016
crude oil (right-hand side)
liquid fuels
gas
electricity
Sources: Eurostat, Bloomberg, BIS and ECB calculations. Note: Latest observations refer to February 2016 (crude oil) and January 2016  
(HICP energy components).
54Box 7  The relationship between HICP inflation 

and HICP inflation excluding energy 

and foodWhile euro area HICP inflation has been very low or 
even negative since the end of 2014, HICP inflation 

excluding energy and food has hovered at levels 
close to 1% over the same period (see Chart A). The presence of a large difference between headline 

inflation and HICP inflation excluding energy and food 

is not unprecedented, although in the past the opposite 
pattern (with headline inflation being higher) has been 
observed more often. With headline inflation dipping 
below HICP inflation excluding energy and food since 

2014, interest in the relationship between the two 
inflation measures and in the role of the latter measure 
in the economic analysis of the ECB™s monetary policy 

strategy has reignited.HICP inflation excluding energy and food and 
headline inflation typically co-move quite closely, 

with the former lagging the latter. 
The lag with 

which HICP inflation excluding energy and food is 

most closely correlated with headline inflation has 

become shorter since the financial crisis. To illustrate 

this, Chart B shows that after the crisis the co-movement with a six-month lag (red line) became stronger than the co-movement with a 12-month lag 

(green line). The fact that HICP inflation excluding 

energy and food lags headline inflation in the short 

run is mainly related to differences in the speed 

of transmission of commodity price shocks to the 

various HICP components. For instance, an oil price 

shock is passed through almost immediately to the 

HICP energy component, and thus
 to headline HICP inflation, but there is a lag in its pass-through to other 

HICP components, via indirect and, possibly, second-

round effects. The shorter lag with which the maximum 

correlation has occurred in recent years may point to 

a somewhat faster pass-through, but could also simply 

capture simultaneity in the timing and direction of oil 

price shocks and other shocks that affect non-energy 

HICP components.
Chart AEuro area HICP inflation and HICP inflation excluding 
energy and food(annual percentage changes)-1
012345199920012003200520072009201120132015
HICP
HICP excluding energy and food
Source: Eurostat.Note: The latest observations are for February 2016.
Chart BCorrelations and lag structure between headline inflation and HICP inflation excluding energy and food
(coefficient of correlation)
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2007200820092010201120122013201420152016
maximum correlation (irrespective of the lag)
contemporaneous correlation
HICP inflation excluding energy and food lagging headline
inflation by 6 months
HICP inflation excluding energy and food lagging headline
inflation by 12 months
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Note: The correlations are computed over an eight-year rolling window; results are 


55HICP inflation excluding energy and food is a poor predictor of developments 
in headline inflation over short horizons, but it can be more informative 
than headline inflation itself for medium-term inflationary trends. This poorer performance of HICP inflation excluding energy and food as a predictor in the short 

term is due to the fact that it lags headline inflation. The table shows the root mean 

squared error (RMSE) for predictions of headline inflation 3, 6, 12 and 24 months 
ahead for both headline inflation and HICP inflation excluding energy and food. At 

shorter horizons, such as 3 and 6 months, current headline inflation provides more 
accurate forecasts than current HICP inflation excluding energy and food, whereas 

the latter performs better at predicting headline inflation 12 and 24 months ahead. 
This is consistent with a situation in which one-off shocks to the price level stemming 

from a change in commodity prices affect the headline inflation rate only for the next 

12 months, but not over a longer horizon. The statistical finding that HICP inflation 

excluding energy and food has better predictive power for medium-term inflationary 
pressures derives from the fact that it is less ﬁnoisyﬂ than headline inflation, as borne 
out by all the measures of volatility presented in the table. HICP inflation excluding 

energy and food is thus useful for looking beyond short-term shocks. HICP inflation excluding energy and food is not an ﬁidealﬂ measure of 
underlying inflation.1 There is no widely accepted definition of underlying inflation, but in practice any such measure should capture the more persistent components of 
inflation and should thus track inflation trends. However, the HICP excluding energy 

and food may at any point in time be affected by temporary factors that have no 

implication for the medium term (e.g. indirect effects of commodity price changes, 

changes in administered prices, indirect taxes or calendar effects). Moreover, the 

excluded energy and food components can themselves have more persistent 
dynamics, for example owing to trends in commodity prices, as was observed in the 
early 2000s. These dynamics could have implications for inflation in the medium 

term and should therefore be captured by a measure of underlying inflation. The fact 

that food and energy prices can have a persistent component is reflected in HICP 

inflation excluding energy and food being a biased indicator of headline inflation over 
the medium term, as its long-term average has been below that of headline inflation. 
Energy prices have increased by an annual average rate slightly below 4% since 
1999, driving a gap between average headline inflation and average HICP inflation 

excluding energy and food. 1 For a more in-depth discussion on this topic, see the box entitled ﬁAre sub-indices of the HICP 
measures of underlying inflation?ﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, December 2013.Table
Mean, volatility and predictive power for headline inflation, January 1999-February 2016MeanVolatilityPredictive power for headline inflation at various horizonsAverage inflation rateStandard deviationCoefficient of variationMean absolute changeRMSE 3 monthsRMSE 6 monthsRMSE 12 monthsRMSE 24 months
1.790.950.530.180.500.751.181.36
and food1.430.460.320.11
0.910.951.021.14Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.




computed based on annual growth rates.56The ECB has formulated its price stability objective in terms of headline inflation mainly on account of its relevance for measuring citizens™ purchasing 

power. 
The preservation of the purchasing power of the currency, as measured by 

the most representative price index, including energy and food (which account for 
about 30% of the consumption basket), is what matters for consumers. In addition, 
any measure of inflation that excludes some of the items in the consumption basket 
suffers from a certain degree of arbitrariness, which could undermine the credibility 

of the policy objective.The medium-term orientation of the ECB™s monetary policy ensures that 
there is no undue emphasis on short-term inflation developments. The very 
imperfect degree of control that central banks can exert over any measure of 
inflation in the near term is a key reason why the ECB™s monetary policy strategy 

has been articulated in terms of medium-term inflation stabilisation. The medium-

term orientation of monetary policy makes it possible to look through transitory 
developments and focus on underlying inflation trends. While, under some 
circumstances, the central bank can extend the length of the medium-term horizon 
over which it is committed to bringing inflation back into line with its aim, this horizon 
cannot be stretched to such a length that citizens can no longer verify in any 
meaningful way whether the central bank™s objective has been achieved or not. 
In line with these considerations, all central banks in the major industrialised economies focus on headline inflation when formulating their price stability 
objectives. However, many central banks, including the ECB, monitor a wide range 

of underlying inflation measures, which abstract from short-term volatility, to gauge 

inflationary trends. In addition to HICP inflation excluding energy and food, the ECB 

monitors various exclusion-based measures and model-based measures of inflation, 
as well as developments in long-term inflation expectations.22 See the box entitled ﬁHas underlying inflation reached a turning point?ﬂ, 
Economic Bulletin, ECB, July 2015; and the article entitled ﬁInflation expectations in the euro area: a review of recent developmentsﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, February 2011.57Box 8  The 2016 macroeconomic imbalance 
procedure and the implementation 
of the 2015 country-specific 
recommendationsThe 2016 macroeconomic imbalance procedure (MIP) represents the fifth time that this macroeconomic surveillance tool has been applied, following its establishment in November 2011. 
This procedure seeks to prevent the emergence of harmful macroeconomic imbalances in EU countries and correct them where they 
are excessive. Following the initial screening on the basis of a set of indicators in 
autumn, the European Commission conducts in-depth reviews of selected countries 
(as part of its annual country reports) to assess the severity of any imbalances. If 
imbalances are found to be present, the Member State concerned receives policy 
recommendations from the Council of the European Union (which are based on 
recommendations by the Commission) under the preventive arm of the procedure. 
However, if imbalances are found to be excessive, the excessive imbalance 

procedure (EIP) is supposed to be initiated following a recommendation by the 
Commission.1 Under this corrective arm of the procedure, a corrective action plan needs to be provided in order to explain how these excessive imbalances will be 
addressed. In the event of a repeated failure to provide an adequate plan or a failure 
to comply with an approved plan, the Council may impose financial sanctions on the 
euro area country in question.Outcome of the European Commission™s 2016 MIP assessment 
On 8 March the European Commission identified five countries as having excessive imbalances (Bulgaria, France, Croatia, Italy and Portugal; 
see Table
 A). Excessive imbalances had already been identified in all five countries last year. For Germany, Ireland, Spain, Netherlands, Slovenia, Finland 
and Sweden, the Commission identified imbalances. For these countries, a direct 
comparison with the Commission™s 2015 assessments is not possible, given that 

three of the assessment categories used last year have been merged this year.
2 This new category covers all imbalances that are not severe enough to be labelled 
ﬁexcessiveﬂ. Another new development this year concerns the Commission™s 

decision to conduct ﬁspecific monitoringﬂ for all countries in this new category. 
1 See recital 22 of Regulation (EU) No 1176/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
16 November 2011 on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances.2 Three old categories (ﬁimbalances which require policy action and monitoringﬂ, ﬁimbalances which 

require decisive policy action and monitoringﬂ and ﬁimbalances which require decisive policy action and 
specific monitoringﬂ) have now been merged to form one category Œ ﬁimbalancesﬂ.58However, this monitoring process, which last year was applied only to countries with 
more severe imbalances, will vary across countries depending on the severity of the 
situation. In addition, the Commission closed the procedures applied to Belgium, 
Hungary, Romania and the United Kingdom after finding that the imbalances 

identified last year were no longer present. Estonia and Austria, which were also 

selected for an in-depth review this year, were also found to have no imbalances. 

Overall, therefore, the number of countries with no imbalances has increased since 
last year. However, this seems to stem more from a stronger focus on countries
 with more severe imbalances, rather than resulting from the adoption of successful 
policy measures, as the implementation of reforms has been fairly limited overall 
(see Table B).Despite having identified excessive imbalances in five countries, the European 

Commission is not proposing to activate the excessive imbalance procedure (i.e. the corrective arm of the procedure). Thus, it has again decided against 

making full use of all available measures. The countries with excessive imbalances 

have, however, been asked to propose ambitious policy measures in their National 

Reform Programmes (which are to be submitted by April). In the case of Croatia 

and Portugal, the Commission has specifically indicated that it will scrutinise those 

programmes, and if they do not contain the necessary policy measures, it will consider 

opening the excessive imbalance procedure for those two countries in May 2016.In order to ensure the credibility and effectiveness of the MIP, it is essential to verify ex post that national authorities actually implement the reforms that they have committed themselves to. Against this background, the Commission 

conducts an annual assessment looking at the extent to which countries are 
complying with the country-specific recommendations (CSRs) addressed to them.  
Table A
European Commission™s conclusions on the 2016 macroeconomic imbalance procedure
(1) No imbalances(2) Imbalances(3) Excessive imbalances(4) Excessive imbalances and application of the corrective arm (EIP)20152016
201520162015201620152016(i) policy actions(ii) decisive policy actions(iii) decisive policy actions and specific monitoringvarying degrees of specific monitoringspecific monitoring
CZBE*BE
DEIEDEBGBGDKCZNL
HUESIEFR**FREEDKRO
SIESHR**HR**LVEE*FI
NLITITLTLV
SESIPTPT**LULTUKFIMTLU
SEATHU*PLMT
SKAT*
PLRO*SKUK*Source: European Commission.Notes: In 2015, countries with imbalances were divided into three categories: (i) imbalances which require policy action and monitoring; (ii) imbalances which require decisive policy 







will it not invoke the corrective arm. The same has been applied to France and Croatia in 2015.
59In the case of the 2015 CSRs, the analysis is contained in the country reports published by the Commission on 26 February 2016.Assessment of the implementation of the 2015 country-specific recommendationsOverall, EU Member States have not yet done enough to implement reforms in response to the 2015 CSRs (see Table B)
. The Commission finds that, for the overwhelming majority of reform recommendations (more than 90%), there has been only ﬁsomeﬂ or ﬁlimitedﬂ progress with implementation, while just a few have been 
ﬁsubstantiallyﬂ or ﬁfullyﬂ implemented. This weak reform momentum stands in stark 

contrast to last year™s finding that an increasing number of countries had excessive 

imbalances. Despite their greater vulnerability, the five countries identified last year 

as having excessive imbalances did not, on average, achieve significantly higher 
implementation rates than the average EU Member State. As noted above, this is 

worrying given that those countries committed themselves to an ambitious reform 
agenda in 2015, thereby convincing the Commission not to apply the EIP. This casts 

doubt on the reliability of ex ante reform announcements when deciding whether or 
not to apply the excessive imbalance procedure.In fact, reform efforts have deteriorated even further, in spite of a lower 
number of CSRs. Last year, the Commission concluded that most countries had 
made only ﬁsomeﬂ or ﬁlimitedﬂ progress with the implementation of the 2014 CSRs. 
This year, the number of cases where ﬁsubstantial progressﬂ has been made or 

CSRs have been ﬁfully addressedﬂ is even lower (4%, compared with 7% in 2014). 
This further loss of reform momentum is made all the more worrying by the fact that 
the Commission has significantly reduced the number of CSRs (cutting them by a Table B
European Commission™s assessment of the implementation of the 2015 country-specific recommendations
BEBGCZDKDEEEIEESFRHRITLVLTLUHUMTNLATPLPTROSISKFISEUK
CSR 1Not assessedCSR 2Fully 
addressedCSR 3Substantial 
progressCSR 4Some 
progressCSR 5Limited 
progressCSR 6No 
progress2016 MIP category(1)(3)(1)(1)(2)(1)(2)(2)(3)(3)(3)(1)(1)(1)(1)(1)(2)(1)(1)(3)(1)(2)(1)(2)(2)(1)
Source: European Commission.Notes: ﬁNo progressﬂ means that the Member State has neither announced nor adopted any measures to address the CSRs. This also applies if a Member State has commissioned 

a study group to evaluate possible measures. ﬁLimited progressﬂ means that the Member State has announced some measures to address the CSRs, but these measures appear 


measures appear promising, but not all of them have been implemented and implementation is not guaranteed in all cases. ﬁSubstantial progressﬂ means that the Member State 
has adopted measures, most of which have been implemented, which go a long way towards addressing the CSRs. ﬁFully addressedﬂ means that the Member State has adopted 
and implemented appropriate measures that address the CSR. ﬁNot assessedﬂ applies to cases in which CSR 1 pertains mostly or exclusively to the Stability and Growth Pact, 
compliance with which will be assessed by the European Commission in spring 2016.
For 2016 MIP category labels, see Table A.
60third, from 157 in 2014 to 102 in 2015) in order to allow Member States to focus on key priority issues of macroeconomic and social relevance.Overall, Member States have implemented proportionally fewer recommendations on product market than labour market policies. According to the Commission™s assessment, ﬁnoﬂ or ﬁlimitedﬂ progress has been made, with around 70% of CSRs calling for product market reforms. The implementation rate 

for labour market reforms is significantly better, with around 50% of CSRs falling into 

that category. Examples of product market-related CSRs include calls for Member 

States to (i) reduce barriers preventing new firms from entering network industries 
(energy, transport, communication, etc.), (ii) open up closed professions, and 

(iii) improve their regulatory frameworks in order to foster competition and encourage business-friendly conditions more generally. Improving all of these areas is key to achieving stronger productivity growth.Neither has there been a particular focus on policies fostering investment. Reforms with the potential to encourage investment growth in Europe span a wide 
range of policy areas. Besides sector-specific regulation and regulatory quality 
(in the area of product market reforms), important roles are also played by labour and education, taxation, research and innovation, public administration, insolvency 
frameworks and the business environment more generally. Given the specific emphasis placed on this issue by the Member States,3 as well as the Commission™s 
investment plan on reviving investment, one might have expected a higher 
implementation rate for such reforms. According to the Commission, Member States 

have made only ﬁsomeﬂ or ﬁlimitedﬂ progress with almost all investment-related 
CSRs.Full and effective use of all instruments available under the MIP Œ including its corrective arm Œ could help to increase the momentum of reform. The further slowdown observed in the implementation of reforms stands in stark contrast to the need to address the major vulnerabilities that remain in many euro area countries 
and the need to increase resilience. Countries™ poor track records in this regard 

suggest that policy commitments made by Member States in their National Reform 
Programmes and repeated calls for decisive action on the part of the Commission 
represent insufficient enforcement mechanisms. The tools available under the 

corrective arm could improve reform efforts, thereby increasing countries™ resilience 

and improving the functioning of EMU.3 As expressed, for example, by the first of the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines approved by the 
Council on 18-19 June 2015, which focuses on ﬁpromoting investmentﬂ.61Articles Transmission of output shocks Œ  

the role of cross-border production 
chainsGlobalisation has led to a rapid increase in euro area trade and facilitated the  
build-up of global production chains. Although these developments boost welfare 

as they increase the international division of labour (which drives growth and 
productivity), they also pose some challenges. Depending on the position of the 
euro area and its trading partners in these chains, economic disturbances from other 
parts of the world can be transmitted to the euro area in a more complex manner 
than traditional trade statistics can capture. This article describes global value chains 

in which the euro area participates and explores their role in the transmission of 
economic output shocks. If the final destination of euro area exports is considered, 
value added produced in the euro area (including that which is further processed 
and re-exported by large trading partners) is largely absorbed by advanced 
economies, notably the United States. Thus the euro area is likely to be relatively 

strongly affected by demand developments in the United States but less affected 

by developments in China, for example, which re-exports a proportion of euro area 
exports. 1 IntroductionThe world has become increasingly interconnected following several decades 
of rapid globalisation, which has facilitated the development of international 
production chains. This has made it possible for firms to specialise their production in several stages across different countries and benefit from an increase in the 

international division of labour. While increasing links across the global economy is 

a positive development Œ as it improves growth by reducing production costs and 
transmitting know-how across countries and regions Œ it may also change the way 
foreign shocks are transmitted to the euro area. Gross trade figures in part double-count trade flows, as a portion of exports consists of imported inputs and a part of exported output is later imported 
back into the country of origin.1 This implies that any analysis based on 
gross trade data may overestimate the importance of some trading partners and 
underestimate the importance of others. This article uses data from the World  
1 See Koopman, R., Wang, Z. and Wei, S.J., ﬁTracing Value-Added and Double Counting in Gross 
Exportsﬂ, American Economic Review, Vol. 104, No 2, 2014, pp. 459-94, and Johnson, R. C. and Noguera, G., ﬁAccounting for Intermediates: Production Sharing and Trade in Value Addedﬂ, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 86, No 2, 2012, pp. 224-36.62Input-Output Database2 to calculate several measures of trade links identified by the literature on global value chains and value added in trade, and examines role of global production chains in transmitting foreign output shocks to the euro area. 
To streamline the analysis, the focus is on trade with four major trading partners of 

the euro area, namely the United States, China, the United Kingdom and Russia, 
which are also interesting cases to consider because they are important for different 

types of trade. Section 1 provides an overview of trends in euro area trade, focusing 
on the participation of the euro area in global value chains and outlining different 

trade measures used in the subsequent analysis. Section 2 discusses the increased 
importance of external developments for the euro area by tracing euro area value 
added through the global value chains to its final destination. Section 3 estimates the 
implications for the transmission of output shocks on the basis of the different trade 

measures, and Section 4 provides concluding remarks. 2 Characteristics of euro area trade and global value chain 
participationThe past few decades have seen global trade boosted by technological and policy developments, with intra-euro area trade benefiting from the advent of 
Economic and Monetary Union. Global trade has expanded substantially over the past few decades as a result of technological advances lowering transportation and 
communication costs. Furthermore, economic policy in many countries has been 
directed broadly towards removing trade barriers and reaching trade agreements. 
Large and previously relatively closed countries such as China have opened up 
their economies and become important players in international trade. The further integration of the European Union with the establishment of Economic and Monetary 
Union in 1999 has strengthened the Internal Market for euro area exporters and 
facilitated cross-border transactions.Trade within the euro area and the euro area™s external trade have both 
expanded, and the euro area has consequently become increasingly reliant 
on foreign economic developments. From 2000 to the end of 2015, intra-euro area goods exports increased by around 25%, while extra-euro area goods exports 
increased by almost 75% (see Chart 1). During this period, the euro area also 
became increasingly reliant on foreign economic developments, which reflects 
stronger growth in world imports of goods than in euro area domestic demand 
(see Chart 2). Technological advancements and policy agreements have also stimulated the build-up of international production chains. The emergence of global value 
chains as an important way of organising production is one of the most prominent 2 The World Input-Output Database is a result of a project funded by the European Commission and 
carried out by a large number of research institutions. For more detailed information on the database, 
see Timmer, M.P., Dietzenbacher, E., Los, B., Stehrer, R. and de Vries, G.J., ﬁAn Illustrated User 
Guide to the World Input-Output Database: the Case of Global Automotive Productionﬂ, Review of International Economics, Vol. 23, 2015, pp. 575-605.63features of globalisation.3 While global production has always been a part of international trade, the rapid integration of firms in global value chains seen during the past few decades is something entirely new. Previously, global trade usually 

implied simply that production was located away from consumption of the final 
product. In global value chains, the various parts of a production process can also be 
divided among different regions of the world, making it possible to take advantage of 

the gains from increased specialisation in individual tasks.In the euro area, global value chain participation has increased for most countries since the mid-1990s. This mainly reflects the increasing vertical 

specialisation of euro area countries, i.e. the increasing import content of their 
exports (see Box 1). While the participation of euro area countries in global value 
chains has generally increased, larger euro area countries usually have less 
foreign value added in their exports. This can partly be explained by the scale of 

their domestic markets, which enables them to source more intermediary products 
internally.
4Box 1Different measures of bilateral trade 
This box reviews different measures of bilateral trade that can provide a clearer picture of trade relations than offered by gross export figures alone. The literature on global value chains 
and value added in trade shows that compiling gross trade data entails a partial double counting 3 See for example Amador, J. and Cabral, S., ﬁGlobal value chains: surveying drivers and measuresﬂ, 
Working Paper Series, No 1739, ECB, 2014, or Elms, D.K. and Low, P. (eds.), Global value chains in a changing world, World Trade Organization, Geneva, 2013.4 It is important to note that a number of factors explain the extent of a country™s participation in global 

value chains. In addition to market size, factors include the country™s level of economic development, 
industrial structure, trade policies and quality of infrastructure.Chart 1Euro area goods exports(index: January 2000 = 100)50100150200250200020032006200920122015
intra-euro area exportsextra-euro area exports
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Note: Exports are in volumes.Chart 2World imports and euro area domestic demand
(index: Q1 2000 = 100) 50
100
150
200
250
200020032006200920122015
domestic demand
world (excluding euro area) imports of goods
Sources: Eurostat, CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis and ECB 
calculations.
Note: Domestic demand comprises total investment, private consumption and 
government consumption.64of trade flows. Exports consist in part of imported foreign value added and domestic value added that is later imported back into the country of origin or exported further by a trading partner. These 

components mean that gross export figures overstate the implications of bilateral trade links and do 
not necessarily capture the importance of final exports to one country for another country. Lately, 

efforts have been made to construct a practical framework for decomposing gross exports into its 

value added components, notably by Koopman et al. (see footnote 1).Chart A presents a simplified illustration of gross exports and its decomposition, based on Koopman et al. In Chart A
 gross exports consists of domestic value added and foreign value added, which is roughly the import content of exports and reflects how a country uses foreign inputs in its exports. Domestic value added in exports represents the contribution of domestic factors of 
production such as labour (compensation of employees) and capital (gross operating surplus) to 
exports. It consists of i) direct exports, i.e. final goods exports and intermediate exports that are 
consumed at the receiving destination; ii) indirect exports, i.e. value added that is exported to one 
destination (where further value is added) and later sent on to a second (final) destination; and 
iii) value added that is later returned to the country of origin as imports. From this decomposition, it is possible to construct indicators of global value chain 
participation and highlight different kinds of trade. For example, direct and indirect exports reflect different relations between two economies. Direct exports captures the direct importance of one trade partner for another, as all finished and intermediate products that are exported are 

absorbed and therefore directly linked to domestic demand in the importing country. Indirect 

exports, meanwhile, is connected not directly to the domestic economy of the importing country but 
to final demand elsewhere. The two concepts thus capture different trade links, depending on the 

role of the partner country in the global value chain (direct importer versus re-exporter). While the concepts in Chart A are important to a better understanding of trade links, corresponding data are rarely available through traditional sources and the different concepts often require large amounts of data to construct. T
o address this issue, several Chart ASchematic view of gross exports and its decomposition into value addedGross exports 
Domestic value  
added in exports 
Exports of
final goods
Exports of  
intermediates absorbed 
by importers
Exports of intermediates 
exported to a
second destination
Exported  intermediates
that return home
Foreign value   
added in exports 
Direct exports
Indirect exports
Source: Based on Koopman, Wang and Wei, ﬁTracing Value-Added and Double Counting in Gross Exportsﬂ (see footnote 1).
65research initiatives have been dedicated to constructing global input-output tables.5 In this article, the concepts in Chart A are derived from the publically available World Input-Output Tables.
6National input-output tables show transactions between sectors in an economy, while the 
World Input-
Output Tables connect national tables with international trade flows. Through national input-output tables, it is possible to assess the importance of one sector as a supplier for 
another sector™s final output. Building on national input-output tables, the World Input-Output Tables 

connect countries and sectors together through international trade flows, making it possible to trace 
the importance of a supplying industry in one country for an industry in another country. The tables 

cover 40 countries and 35 sectors from 1995 to 2011 and cover around 85% of world GDP, making 

them an indispensable tool for bilateral trade analysis. 5 For example, the World Input-Output Database, the WTO-OECD Trade in Value Added (TiVA) database or the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) Database.6 See www.wiod.org
Chart BDecomposition of gross exports in the euro area into value added components(percentages of gross exports)0%20%40%
60%80%DEESFRITothereuro area
Foreign value added in exports19952000200520110%20%40%60%80%DEESFRITothereuro area
Direct exports0%2%4%6%
8%10%DEESFRITothereuro area
Indirect exports0%
2%4%6%
8%10%DEESFRITothereuro area
Exports that are later imported backSources: World Input-Output Tables and Stehrer, R., ﬁAccounting Relations in Bilateral Value Added Tradeﬂ, wiiw Working Paper, No 101, Vienna Institute for 
International Economic Studies (wiiw), May 2013.
66Foreign value added in exports and indirect exports have grown in importance for most 
large euro area economies. The development of the components of gross exports illustrated in 

Chart A is shown in Chart B, where they are calculated using the World Input-Output Tables up 

to 2011. Since 1995 foreign value added has increased as a share of gross exports in the four 
largest euro area countries, reflecting the growing vertical specialisation of euro area exporters 

vis-à-vis both other euro area countries and countries outside the euro area.7 The share of direct 
exports has decreased over time. Indirect exports increased in the 2000s as a share of exports, 

although they were slightly lower in 2011 for the largest euro area countries. Exports of intermediate 

inputs that return to the euro area, which represent a relatively small share of gross exports in 

most countries (with the notable exception of Germany), have declined since 1995 in Germany and 

France while, they increased in Spain and Italy until 2005 before falling again up to 2011. 
3 Direct trade links and trade through global value chains Œ 
tracing euro area value addedParticipation in global value chains affects how output shocks are transmitted to the euro area. Since, in global production chains, cross-border signals regarding 
supply and demand might be transmitted faster, the production system as a whole 

may be more susceptible to the transmission of external shocks, which can be 
amplified as they pass through the system. A supply shock would normally propagate 

downstream in a production network, whereas a demand shock is transmitted up 
the supply chain.8 For example, if an industry supplying intermediate products is 
hit by a supply shock (a production plant is destroyed by a natural disaster), the 
effect would affect the downstream industries, as they are dependent on inputs from 

the first industry hit by the shock, as was the case after the tsunami that hit Japan 
in 2011.
9 How the effect builds up along the supply chain depends in part on the 
substitutability of the inputs for the purchasing industries. In the case of a demand 
shock, amplification up the supply chain could be due to a ﬁbullwhipﬂ effectﬂ, which 

induces firms to adjust their inventories to new expected levels of demand along the 
supply chain.10 While the length of the value chain matters for how a shock might be amplified, the focus here is on the position in a global value chain. Whether or 
not the euro area is more susceptible or more resilient to output shocks affecting a 

trading partner would depend on its role in the global value chains and the type of 
shock hitting the economy. 
7 See for example Amador, J., Cappariello, R. and Stehrer, R., ﬁGlobal value chains: a view from the 
euro area,ﬂ Working Paper Series, No 1761, ECB, 2015.8 See Acemoglu, D., Akcigit, U. and Kerr, W., ﬁNetworks and the Macroeconomy: An Empirical 

Explorationﬂ, NBER Working Paper Series, No 21344, 2015.9 See, for example, Interconnected Economies: Benefiting from Global Value Chains
, OECD, 2013.10 The ﬁbullwhipﬂ is, in short, an effect where a final demand shock causes large changes in demand 

for parts and components and firms adjust their inventories along the supply chain to new expected 
levels of demand. For empirical evidence of this effect, see, for example, Alessandria., G., Kaboski, 
J.P. and Midrigan, V., ﬁUS Trade and Inventory Dynamicsﬂ, American Economic Review, Vol. 101(3), or Altomonte, C., Di Mauro, F., Ottaviano, G., Rungi, A. and Vicard, V., ﬁGlobal value chains during the 
great trade collapse: a bullwhip effect?ﬂ, Working Paper Series, No 1412, ECB, 2012.67Foreign demand shocks are transmitted via different trade channels depending on the nature 
of the trade links. In Chart 3, this is illustrated using a four country example, which, for the purpose of 
simplification, considers only partial, first-round trade 
effects of a demand shock; possible general equilibrium 

effects are not considered. In this stylised example, 

countries A and C have direct exports to B and country 

A has direct exports to C. Country A also exports 

indirectly to B via country D. The impact of a demand shock in country B on country A would be transmitted through several channels. First, the bilateral trade impact would be 
through a change in demand for country A™s exports 
to country B (orange arrow). Second, country A would 

be impacted by an ﬁechoﬂ effect (yellow arrow) from 

a change in exports to country C, as country C™s 
demand for country A™s exports changed following the shock in country B.
11 Third, country A would be further affected (blue arrow) by the shock in country B through 

its participation in global value chains with country D, which processes value added 
from country A and exports it onward to B. This example shows that there are a 

number of trade links that need consideration when assessing the possible impact 
of a foreign demand shock on euro area activity. The following paragraphs describe 

euro area trade links in more detail, elaborating on the nature of trade and identifying 
some of the most important trading partners.12 In addition, euro area value added is traced through the exports of its major trading partners to its final destination. The euro area has substantial direct exports to the United States, while China and the United Kingdom are more important for indirect exports that are  

re-exported to other destinations. Charts 4 and 5 compare euro area exports to four major trading partners, the United States, China, the United Kingdom and 
Russia, on the basis of their respective shares in direct exports and indirect exports. 
For direct exports, the United States is the most important destination, whereas 
China and the United Kingdom account for a larger share of indirect exports. This 

suggests that the euro area is relatively closely linked to domestic developments 
in the United States, while China and the United Kingdom act to a larger extent as 
intermediaries for euro area exports that are destined for other countries. As regards 

Russia, direct exports are more important than indirect exports. China and the United Kingdom source more than a fifth of their gross exports from outside the respective country.
 In China, the import content of exports 
increased from an average 14% in the second half of the 1990s to 22% in the period 11 An ﬁecho effectﬂ is the spillover effect on the impacted country via other trade partners which are 
also affected by the shock. See Dées S. and Vansteenkiste I., ﬁThe transmission of US cyclical 
developments to the rest of the worldﬂ, Working Paper Series, No 798, ECB, 2007.12 The four trading partners (the United States, the United Kingdom, China and Russia) are among the 

most important for the euro area and also relevant for different types of trade (i.e. exports of final 
products, exports of intermediate inputs that are re-exported to other destinations or exports that are 
processed and later sent back to the euro area).Chart 3An illustration of the transmission of demand shocks through tradeCountry ABilateral trade impactﬁechoﬂ trade impactTrade impactfrom global value chainCountry DCountry BCountry CSource: ECB.Note: The chart illustrates a demand shock that originates in country B and its impact 

through the various trade channels on country A.
68leading up to the 2008-09 recession (Chart 6). While declining somewhat during the crisis years, foreign value added in exports rebounded in 2011. For both the United 

Kingdom and the United States, the import content of exports increased during 
the crisis years and also in 2011 compared with the pre-crisis period. In Russia, by 

contrast, foreign value added in exports declined throughout the 2000s and stood at 
6% in 2011. 
Value added sourced from the euro area accounts for a relatively large share 
of the gross exports of the United Kingdom, but a smaller share for China, Russia and the United States. The United Kingdom sources a relatively large share 
of its exports from the euro area (see the grey bars in 
Chart 6). However, this share has become smaller over 

time and does not follow the general trend of increasing 
foreign value added in exports. In China, by contrast, 
euro area value added increased during the pre-crisis 
period compared with the mid-1990s and has been 
broadly stable in the post-crisis period at around 3% 
of gross exports. In the United States, the share of 
euro area value added in exports has been stable at 
around 2% throughout the period covered in the World Input-Output Tables. For Russia, the share declined 

from almost 4% in the 1990s and the pre-crisis period 
to 2% thereafter. 
To properly account for all trade links of the euro 
area, it is necessary to also consider the final 
destination of the euro area™s indirect exports 

via its large trading partners. For China, which is a relatively important intermediary for such exports, 
the largest portion of value added originating in the Chart 4Direct exports of the euro area(percentages of direct exports) 0%
5%
10%
15%

20%

25%
30%
DEESFRITothereuro area
United States
China
United Kingdom
Russia
Sources: World Input-Output Tables and ECB calculations.
Note: ﬁOtherﬂ is an average of the shares of the remaining euro area countries. Latest 
available data: 2011.
Chart 5Indirect exports of the euro area(percentages of indirect exports) 0%5%10%15%20%25%
30%DEESFRITothereuro area
United StatesChinaUnited KingdomRussiaSources: World Input-Output Tables and ECB calculations.
Note: ﬁOtherﬂ is an average of the shares of the remaining euro area countries. Latest 
available data: 2011.
Chart 6Foreign value added in exports of large trading partners of the euro area(percentage of total gross exports)0%10%20%United StatesChinaUnited KingdomRussia
1995-992000-07
2008-102011euro areaSources: World Input-Output Tables and ECB calculations.
Note: The grey bars refer to the respective shares of foreign value added sourced from 

the euro area. Latest available data: 2011.
69euro area is destined for other advanced economies (see orange bars in Chart 7) such as the United States and Japan. For the United Kingdom, around 
43% of the value added originating in the euro area is 
exported back for final use (dark blue bars in Chart 7) 
and hence dependent on domestic demand in the euro 
area. In addition, 22% is exported to other advanced 
economies, of which the United States accounts for 
the largest share. The final destinations of euro area value added that is exported further by the United 
States are relatively evenly spread between advanced 
economies and emerging market economies on the 
American continent (such as Canada, Mexico and 
Brazil). In Russia, the value added originating in the 
euro area is predominantly exported back to the euro 
area or exported further to the ﬁrest of the worldﬂ (dark 
blue and light blue bars, respectively, in Chart 7), while 

re-exports to other advanced economies and emerging 
market economies account for a smaller share.The trade impact on the euro area from a demand disturbance in the United States is likely to be 
substantial through both bilateral trade effects and 
echo effects, while a similar shock in China would 
have less impact on euro area activity. 
Demand from 
the United States represents a substantial driver of 
many countries™ direct exports (Chart 8). Many of these 

economies (China, the United Kingdom and the ﬁrest of 
the worldﬂ) are also important destinations for euro area 
direct exports. Hence, the trade impact on the euro area 
from a demand disturbance in the United States is likely 
to be substantial, through both bilateral trade effects 

and echo effects. Moreover, the final demand for euro 

area indirect exports via other countries would also be 
affected. Demand disturbances in China, on the other 

hand, would likely have a smaller impact on euro area 
activity, since China is an important destination for euro 

area indirect exports. A large portion of these exports 

are subsequently re-exported to the United States and 
are hence affected by demand developments there. 

While other Asian countries (and Australia) have large 

direct exports to China, they account only for a small 
share of euro area direct exports. Chart 7Final destination of value added originating in the euro area and further exported by large trading partners(percentages of total foreign value added in exports)0%20%40%
60%80%100%United StatesChinaUnited KingdomRussia
euro areacentral and eastern European countriesother advanced economiesemerging market economiesrest of the worldSources: World Input-Output Tables and ECB calculations. 


World Input-Output Tables. 

Latest available data: 2011.
Chart 8The relevance of large trading partners for non-euro area countries(percentages of direct exports)0%20%40%60%80%United StatesCzech RepublicUnited KingdomPolandTurkeyRussiaDenmarkSwedenIndonesiaChinaBrazilJapanIndiaSouth Korearest of the worldAustraliaTaiwanMexicoCanadaUnited StatesChinaUnited KingdomRussiaSources: World Input-Output Tables and ECB calculations.
Notes: Percentages indicate the share of the respective country™s total direct exports 

to the United States, the United Kingdom, China and Russia, which are large trading 
partners of the euro area. The ﬁrest of the worldﬂ is a grouping of all countries not 



Latest available data: 2011. 
704 Measuring global value chains Œ
 implications for the transmission of output shocksTaking into account the final destination of euro area exports provides a more 
detailed picture of global shock transmission. By taking into account the different 
types of trade link and by identifying the final destination of euro area exports, 
it is possible to assess and quantify each of the different trade channels and their potential for shock transmission (as illustrated in Chart 3). Using trade elasticities and the different trade measures captures cross-country linkages via the bilateral trade impact, the impact via global value 
chains and echo effects via other trading partners. In Box 2 the total trade impact from an (unidentified) output shock emanating from one of the largest 
trading partners is first quantified using traditional gross trade flows. Thereafter, 

only the relevant channels are considered, namely, the bilateral trade impact, the 

impact through global value chains and the echo effects via other trading partners. 

The results suggest that the total impact from each of the four trading partners 
considered is somewhat smaller than suggested by traditional gross trade flows, 
which is consistent with the view that gross exports represents some double 
counting. The type of output disturbance also affects the way shocks are propagated. For example, a demand shock (such as changed consumer preferences or increased government spending) in the United States would probably have a large 
impact on the euro area. A supply shock (such as a natural disaster disrupting 

production) would have smaller ramifications, as the United States is less significant 
as a destination for indirect exports of the euro area. For China, the relationship is 
the reverse. A demand shock would probably have a smaller impact, while a supply 

shock would be of greater importance for the euro area.Box 2Output shock transmission to the euro area via bilateral trade, global value chains and 
echo effects 
The aim of this box is to quantify the effect of a foreign output shock on the euro area by differentiating between the bilateral trade impact, the impact via global value chains and 
the echo effect through other trading partners. The three effects presented in Chart 3 are 
considered, namely: 1) the bilateral trade impact of a shock from changed consumption of direct 
exports; 2) the impact via indirect exports (through another trading partner) to the country in which 
the shock originates; and 3) the echo effect via other trading partners.  
This approach focuses on euro area value added finally consumed in the trading partner country in question. Unlike gross trade figures, this approach does not consider value added which originated in other countries (foreign value added) and the exports that ultimately return to 
the euro area but does take into account indirect exports that are finally absorbed by the partner 
country.
71The impact is computed for each of the three channels. On the one hand, the trade effect of 
a shock in a partner country depends on the elasticity of euro area GDP to imports. On the other 
hand, the impact varies with exposure of the euro area to that country and the elasticity of euro 
area imports to the country™s GDP. Furthermore, the effect stemming from the bilateral trade links 

is accompanied by an echo effect, which is the spillover effect on the euro area via other trade 

partners which are also affected by the shock. The shares of gross, direct and indirect imports and 

exports in GDP are computed as the respective measure divided by GDP. The demand elasticity to 

GDP is assumed to be 0.6 for all countries and the country-specific import elasticities are assigned 

the values used in Dées and Vansteenkiste (see footnote 11).
13The impact of a GDP shock differs when direct and indirect trade are considered instead of 
gross trade. The table compares the total contemporaneous impact of a 1% GDP shock in each 
of the four major trading partners on the euro area on the basis of gross trade with the combined 
impact of direct and indirect trade.14 The difference between the two impacts depends on the 
contribution of the individual trade components. For instance, in the case of China and the United 
Kingdom, using gross trade as a measure of trade links would overstate the effect of a GDP shock 

as compared with the sum of direct and indirect trade. This can be explained by the fact that a large 

share of euro area exports to these countries represents indirect exports that are re-exported to 
other destinations and hence not absorbed in China and the United Kingdom. The United States, 

on the other hand, is a major final destination for euro area indirect exports that are re-exported by 
other trading partners. Therefore, the overall impact of a GDP shock in China, the United Kingdom 

and Russia on the euro area declines when direct and indirect trade are considered instead of 
gross trade. For the United States, the decline is much smaller (and the impact even increases for 
Germany). The chart shows the decomposed trade impact of a 1% GDP shock in the four major euro area trading partners. A shock originating in the United States affects the euro area mainly via 
other trading partners (the echo impact, yellow bars) and through bilateral trade (orange bars). 
This shows the importance of the United States as an export destination for the euro area but 13 The import elasticities of the few economies not included in the sample analysed in Dées and 
Vansteenkiste (see footnote 11) are approximated by the values for countries of similar size in the 
same region included in their sample.14 These estimates are based on the contemporaneous impact. The overall estimated impact could be 

larger when dynamic effects are also considered.Table
Comparison of trade impacts Œ gross trade versus direct and indirect trade(percentage responses to a 1% GDP shock)
United StatesChinaUnited KingdomRussiaGross tradeDirect and indirect tradeGross trade
Direct and indirect tradeGross trade
Direct and indirect tradeGross trade
Direct and indirect tradeGermany0.340.360.150.120.120.100.040.04France0.240.220.090.060.090.070.030.02Italy0.230.220.100.060.080.060.040.03Spain0.220.190.070.040.080.060.020.02Euro area0.280.280.11
0.080.100.080.040.03Source: ECB calculations.Notes: Data are the overall impact of a 1% shock in the country shown in the respective column heading. Euro area impacts are weighted averages of the 
impacts on member countries, weighted by GDP at purchasing power parity.
72also for many of the latter™s trading partners. Moreover, the euro area would also be impacted by 
the change in demand for its indirect exports that are passed on to the United States via trading 
partners (blue bars). In China, the bilateral and echo impacts are fairly equal in size, with an 
additional small impact through global value chains that accounts for less than a tenth of the total 
impact. For a shock originating in the United Kingdom or Russia, slightly more than half of the 
effect stems from the bilateral trade impact and more than a third from echo effects, with the rest 

stemming from global value chains. Among the four largest euro area economies, Germany faces the largest impact from a GDP shock in any of the four major trading partners. This may be explained by Germany™s greater 
trade openness compared with other European countries. Shocks transmitted via both direct and 
indirect trade effects are bigger for Germany than for the euro area as a whole.
While this exercise outlines the importance of taking into account different trade links and the final destination of euro area exports, some caveats should be highlighted. First, the size of the impact is dependent on the underlying country-specific trade to GDP elasticities. 
ChartTrade impact of a 1% real GDP shock in major trading partners
(percentage points)0.000.050.100.150.20
0.25
0.300.350.40DEESFRITeuro area
China0.000.050.100.150.20
0.25
0.300.350.40DEESFRITeuro area
United Statesimpact through global value chain"echo" impactbilateral trade impact0.000.050.100.150.20DEESFRITeuro area
United Kingdom0.000.050.100.150.20DEESFRITeuro area
RussiaSource: ECB calculations. Notes: The country from which the real GDP shock originates is indicated in the title of each panel. Data for the euro area are averages of the impacts on 

member countries, weighted by GDP at purchasing power parity.
73Recently, aggregate global trade elasticities have been on a declining path.
15 If this is a result of declining elasticities in the various trading partners and not of a changing composition of trade within the global economy, it would reduce the estimated impact of an output shock on the euro 

area. Second, it is possible that different kinds of trade have different trade elasticities, depending 

on the sectoral composition and the degree of substitutability of the products being imported. In 
this example, the same trade elasticities are used for all kinds of trade. Third, the data underlying 

this analysis is only available up to 2011, and it is possible that the nature of trade has changed 

since then, which would affect the relationships captured in the chart.
16 Moreover, the analysis only 
considers shocks via trade and does not take into account other transmission channels, such as 
the financial channel or confidence effects among firms and households. Notwithstanding these 

caveats, the exercise in this box serves to show how gross trade may provide a misleading picture 
of the importance of trading partners and the importance of different trade channels.
5 Concluding remarks
The euro area has become increasingly integrated in global trade and  

cross-border production chains. The nature of these trade links varies across its 
main trading partners. For example, the euro area has very strong direct trade links 
with the United States, while China and the United Kingdom are more important as 
intermediaries of euro area exports. This suggests that euro area activity is relatively 

strongly affected via trade by domestic demand developments in the United States, 

while less so by developments in China and the United Kingdom. In the case of 
China, euro area value added is mostly re-exported to the United States, but also to 
Japan and South Korea. As regards the United Kingdom and Russia, their role as 

intermediaries mainly reflects their role in processing euro area value added which is 
later exported back to the euro area, to other advanced economies or the ﬁrest of the 
worldﬂ (see Chart 7).The role of the euro area™s trading partners in global value chains affects the 
way output shocks are transmitted to the euro area. First, the bilateral trade 
impact on the euro area following a foreign output shock would be through direct 
exports to the trading partner. Second, there would be an echo trade impact, which 

would depend on how other trading partners are impacted and change their demand 
for euro area exports. Third, there would be an additional impact via trade in global 

value chains, as a share of euro area exports is indirect exports through a trading 
partner to the final destination. The final impact on the euro area following an output 

shock would depend on the combined effect of these different trade channels. 
Quantifying these different impacts suggests a somewhat smaller effect than indicated by gross trade figures for some trading partners. This is because 
15 See the article entitled ﬁUnderstanding the weakness in world tradeﬂ, 
Economic Bulletin, Issue 3,  
ECB, 2015. 16 For example, trade in intermediate goods, which can be closely linked to increases in vertical 
specialisation, seems to have slowed in 2012 and 2013. See the article cited in footnote 15.74value added which originated in other countries and the exports that return to the euro area are excluded. Moreover, bilateral trade seems to account for slightly less 

than half of the total impact from most countries, while the echo effect is of a similar 

magnitude (i.e. around half). Effects through global value chains seem to account for 

around a tenth of the overall impact, depending on the trading partner. 
Given the continual change in cross-border production structures, it is necessary to monitor these developments on an ongoing basis. The World Input-Output Tables are an indispensable tool for analysing global value 
chain developments in a very granular manner. As time passes, however, data 

beyond 2011 will be needed to correctly assess the implications of global value chains (and their development) for the euro area economy. Therefore, initiatives 

encouraging the expansion or regular updates of databases such as the World 

Input-Output Database (or, alternatively, reliance on survey or firm-level data) will be 

increasingly required in the future.75Public investment in EuropeSince the crisis, public investment has fallen in a number of European countries, particularly those that came under market pressure.1 Low levels of public investment, if maintained over a prolonged period, may lead to a deterioration of public capital 
and diminish longer-term output. The fall in public investment and the current 

low interest rate environment have prompted calls to stimulate public investment 
spending as a way to increase short-term demand and raise potential output. 
In the European Union (EU), this has led to the adoption of the Investment Plan for Europe (2015). The fiscal positions of many EU countries remain precarious, however, and the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact call for further fiscal 

consolidation in many of them. Using a model-based analysis, this article considers 
the circumstances under which additional public investment might best stimulate 
economic growth and what the impact on public finances would be.1 IntroductionPublic investment in Europe has fallen in recent years, which has led to calls 
to stimulate public investment in the current low interest rate environment. 
While, for the EU as a whole, the public investment-to-GDP ratio remains at the 

same level as before the crisis, in the euro area the ratio is somewhat lower. 

In particular, recent years have seen the ratio decline in countries that had to undergo sizeable fiscal adjustment owing to market pressure. The fall in public 

investment and persistently weak growth following the crisis have led to a debate 
on the desirability of increasing investment in public infrastructure. In this debate it 
is argued that public investment would be particularly effective in an environment of 

low borrowing costs for governments, in which monetary policy interest rates stand 
at around zero.2 This has resulted in initiatives to stimulate public investment at both 
the national and international levels (see Box 1 on the Investment Plan for Europe).The article assesses the impact of further public investment in terms of economic efficiency, longer-term growth and public finances.
 Section 2 provides 

an overview of recent developments in public investment in Europe and offers a 

comparison with the United States and Japan. Section 3 provides a brief overview 
of different strands of the literature on the contribution of public investment to output 

growth. Section 4 is dedicated to model simulations and examines the effect of 

additional public investment in the euro area. Section 5 concludes.1 In this article, public investment is measured using the gross fixed capital formation of the general 
government, which enables the use of comparable data available for a large number of countries. 
See Box 2 for more information on the limitations of these data and on measurement issues.2 See, for example, ﬁIs it time for an infrastructure push? The macroeconomic effects of public 

investmentﬂ, World Economic Outlook, IMF, 2014.76Box 1The Investment Plan for Europe Œ ﬁthe Juncker planﬂThe Investment Plan for Europe Œ also known as the Juncker Plan, after the current President 
of the European Commission Œ is a package of measures presented by the Commission in 

late 2014, aimed at unlocking public and private investment in the real economy amounting to at least •315 billion (around 2% of EU GDP in 2015) over the period 2015-17.3 The Plan 
has three pillars: (i) setting up a European Fund for Strategic Investment (EFSI) to mobilise private investment; (ii) helping investors to find and launch new investment projects by creating a European 

Investment Advisory Hub and a European Investment Project Portal; and (iii) improving framework 

conditions for investment through structural reforms at the European and national levels. 
With regard to the first pillar, the EFSI 
Regulation was approved in June 2015 Œ less than five months after the Commission presented the legislative proposal Œ and the Fund started its preliminary operations in October of the same year. Operationally, a guarantee of •16 billion 
has been created under the EU budget, which will be used to build EFSI public guarantees. The 
European Investment Bank (EIB) has committed an additional •5 billion. This initial sum of public 

money will give the EFSI a risk-absorbing capacity of •21 billion, which is expected to be leveraged by •294 billion of private funding Œ i.e. by a factor of 15 (which is based on historical experience). 
These funds will be used through two ﬁwindowsﬂ: the Infrastructure and Innovation Window (to be 
deployed by the EIB and expected to finance around 75% of the final •315 billion target) and the 
SME Window (to be deployed by the European Investment Fund (EIF)).The EFSI lending operations are designed to go beyond the standard EIB and EIF activities. EFSI operations should be designed to finance, at ﬁsustainableﬂ rates, those projects that cannot be funded either by the market or by the standard EIB/EIF instruments because of the company™s size, the high risk involved in new technologies or the deadlines required. In this respect, the EFSI 
is expected to generate ﬁadditionalﬂ investment projects alongside the ongoing EIB/EIF investment 
pipeline.4 So far, nine 
Member States (Bulgaria, Germany, Spain, France, Italy, Luxembourg, Poland, 
Slovakia and the United Kingdom) have pledged around •43 billion to co-finance EFSI 
projects, but none have contributed directly to EFSI capital. Despite the favourable treatment, provided under the Stability and Growth Pact, of contributions to the EFSI in the form of guarantees 
or cash, the contributions announced by the above-mentioned Member States will be only at the 
level of individual projects and national investment platforms.5 Hence, these Member States will only be participating in investment projects in their own country. This signals the difficulty involved 
3 See the European Commission™s Communication entitled ﬁAn investment Plan for Europeﬂ, available at 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM:2014:903:FIN.4 For the full description of this requirement, see Annex II which provides the relevant extract of 

Regulation (EU) 2015/1017 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 June 2015 on the 
European Fund for Strategic Investments.5 The Commission clarified in January 2015 that cash contributions used to set up the EFSI will not 

be counted when defining the fiscal adjustment under either the preventive or corrective arm of the 
Stability and Growth Pact. If a country™s budget deficit exceeds 3% of GDP, the Commission will not 
launch an excessive deficit procedure if the excess is due to a contribution to the EFSI, provided that 
the deviation is small and expected to be temporary. Even when assessing the fulfilment of the debt 
criterion, contributions to the EFSI will not be taken into account.77in overcoming the ﬁjuste retourﬂ principle often mentioned in discussions on the EU budget, namely each Member State™s primary concern for ensuring that its contribution to the EU™s financial 

resources flows back into the national economy. EFSI-financed projects will not be allocated on the 

basis of national keys but only on their merits.The second pillar of the Investment Plan is crucial for eliminating a number of procedural and information-related inefficiencies in terms of matching investment projects with private 
and public financing. The European Investment Advisory Hub, established within the EIB and 
financed by both the EIB and the Commission, is expected to: (i) offer investment guidance 

and expertise; (ii) provide a platform for the exchange of know-how; and (iii) coordinate existing 
technical assistance. The European Investment Project Portal, on the other hand, will help investors 

to find investment opportunities by listing investment projects which support EU objectives and are 
expected to start within three years, with or without EFSI funding.To strengthen the work under the third pillar of the Investment Plan, improving the investment 
climate at the Member State level has been made an integral part of the 2016 European Semester process. To this end, the 2016 Annual Growth Survey (AGS) has been accompanied by a 

staff working document on challenges to Member States™ investment environments.
6 The document 
summarises each country™s investment profile and identifies key challenges to investment at the 

national level in the following fields: (i) public administration/business environment; (ii) labour market/
education; (iii) financial sector/taxation; (iv) research, development and innovation; and (v) sector-
specific regulation. The main challenges identified at this stage are expected to be analysed further 

within the framework of the European Semester process, particularly in the country reports, and 

through thematic discussions within the Council and its Committees. These challenges could also lead 

to country-specific recommendations being addressed to individual Member States.An EU agenda will complement Member States™ actions in removing barriers to investment. With regard to the actions to be taken at the European level, the Commission has specified that 
progress towards a ﬁDigital Single Marketﬂ, ﬁEnergy Unionﬂ and ﬁCapital Markets Unionﬂ is key to 
improving the business environment and financing conditions in the EU. The 16 targeted actions 

under the Digital Single Market strategy are expected to be delivered by the end of 2016, while the 
15 actions announced for the Energy Union will be implemented in 2016-17. The action plan for the 

Capital Markets Union was published by the Commission on 30 September 2015.7 The document 
discusses the EFSI and other pillars of the Investment Plan, and announces the Commission™s 

intention to present revised calibrations in EU prudential legislation for the insurance sector 
(the Solvency II Directive) to ensure that insurance companies are subject to regulatory treatment that could further stimulate long-term investment.Further progress under the third pillar of the Investment Plan is crucial for its success. Triggering investments through the use of public funds requires careful examination of how to employ these resources most effectively; at the same time, it requires effective implementation of 
6 See the European Commission™s staff working document entitled ﬁChallenges to Member States™ 
Investment Environmentsﬂ, available at http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/2016/ags2016_challenges_ms_investment_environments_en.pdf.7 See the European Commission™s Communication entitled ﬁAction Plan on Building a Capital Markets Unionﬂ, 

available at http://ec.europa.eu/finance/capital-markets-union/docs/building-cmu-action-plan_en.pdf.78specific public policies, notably structural reforms, in order to improve the investment climate.  
For this reason, the Plan includes a comprehensive set of measures across different policy 

areas. 2015 was marked by swift progress under the first pillar: the 2016 AGS reports that, by 

the end of 2015, the EFSI was expected to have mobilised around •50 billion for investment in 
Europe. This represents around 15% of the overall target agreed for the period 2015-17. In the 

remaining two years, concrete and effective policy measures under the other two pillars will be 

essential to complement EFSI funding and to ensure that these additional funds can be effectively 

deployed and channelled into the European economy. More specifically, under the third pillar, 

the implementation of reforms targeted at frictions that hold back investment demand (such as 
reducing the administrative burden on young firms or speeding up insolvency proceedings) has 
the potential to raise the opportunity cost of investment now and allow finance to flow quickly to 
the new investment opportunities that these reforms create.82 Recent developments in public 
investmentBoth public and private investment have fallen in the years following the 
financial and sovereign debt crisis. After being stable at around 3% of GDP for 
more than a decade, public investment in the euro area started to increase in 2005, reaching 3.6% of GDP in 2009 (see Chart 1). In the years following the crisis, public investment reverted to a ratio below the pre-crisis average of 3% of GDP. 

For the EU as a whole, the public investment ratio follows a similar pattern, with a 
less pronounced post-crisis retrenchment. Developments in public investment in 
Europe mirror developments in the United States, albeit at a lower level. By contrast, 
the public investment-to-GDP ratio in Japan went into long-term decline following 8 See the introductory speech by the President of the ECB at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, 
22 May 2015, available at https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp150522.en.htmlChart 1Public investment(as a percentage of GDP)23
4
5
671995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
euro area 
United States 
Japan 
EU 
Source: European Commission.Chart 2Private investment(as a percentage of GDP)13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
1995199820012004200720102013
euro area
United States
Japan
EU
Source: European Commission.79the high levels observed in the mid-1990s, although more recently it has started to pick up. Private sector investment in Europe declined during and after the crisis, 
and has not yet recovered, by contrast with developments in the United States and 
Japan (see Chart 2). While public investment data are subject to various limitations, 
in particular measurement issues (see Box 2), the recent developments observed in 
public investment are difficult to attribute to those limitations. For example, although 

the increased use of public-private partnerships (PPPs) and privatisations has been 
shifting parts of previously public investment to private investment since the 1970s, 
the decline in post-crisis public investment in the EU has been accompanied by a 
fall, not an increase, in private investment (see Charts 1 and 2).Developments in public investment are very heterogeneous across countries in the EU. When comparing pre-crisis public investment, as a percentage of GDP, 
with the average over the past three years, three distinct groups of countries can 
be identified (see Chart 3). First, there have been large investment cuts in countries 
with substantial fiscal consolidation needs. The largest declines in public investment 

ratios took place in countries with initially high general government investment 
rates, which were in some cases related to pre-crisis booms, and in countries under 
market pressure. Most notably, public investment-to-GDP ratios fell in Croatia, 

Portugal, Greece, Spain, Cyprus and Ireland. Second, in countries with relatively 
low levels of general government investment in the years leading up to the crisis, 
public investment has neither declined much nor increased (Belgium, Germany and 
Austria). Third, public investment has increased in a number of eastern EU countries, 

in particular those that have benefited from the increasing use of cohesion funds 
after joining the EU (Latvia, Poland, Romania and Bulgaria). As a ratio of government expenditure, developments in public investment have been even more heterogeneous across EU countries. When measured as a percentage of GDP (see Chart 3), the investment ratio is influenced by the 
Chart 3Public investment-to-GDP ratio
(as a percentage of GDP)0123
4
5
67HR
PT
GR
ES
CY
IE
MT
SK
CZ
LU
IT
EA
NL
EU
FR
DE
AT
SE
BE
FI
EE
UK
SI
LT
DK
HU
BG
RO
PL

LV
average 2012-2014
average 1995-2007
Source: European Commission. Note: Countries ordered by change in average public investment 2012-14 versus 
1995-2007.Chart 4Public investment-to-government expenditure ratio(as a percentage of government expenditure)02
46810
12
14

16
PT
CY
GR
HR
ES
IE
LU
MT
CZ
IT
SK
NL
EA
FR
EU
FI
BE
SI
AT
DE
EE
UK
SE
DK
LT
HU
BG
RO
PL
LV
average 2012 -2014
average 1995-2007
Source: European Commission. Note: Countries ordered by change in average public investment 2012-14 versus 
1995-2007.80negative effect of the crisis on output growth. As a share of total public expenditure 
(see Chart 4), the decline in investment in countries under market pressure reflects the fact that government investment was used more intensively than other 
expenditure items as a consolidation instrument.Box 2Public investment and capital: data and measurement issuesThis box discusses the limitations of the data on public investment and capital, which should be taken into account when interpreting comparisons across countries and over time. At least four 

specific points may be mentioned. First, the distinction between investment and other government 
expenditure is not always clear with respect to their effect on the productive capacity of the 

economy. In the national accounts, gross fixed capital formation consists of resident producers™ 

acquisitions minus disposals of fixed tangible or intangible assets, in particular machinery and 
equipment, vehicles, dwellings and other buildings. However, while education and health care 

expenditure contributes to reinforcing (private) human capital stock, thus also enhancing the 
supply side of the economy and contributing to growth, it is mostly considered to be current 
expenditure rather than investment. Moreover, public investment also includes expenditure on 

sports stadiums and military equipment, which have debatable effects on the productive capacity 

of the economy. The distinction between capital and consumption spending has also changed over 

time. For example, under the current statistical standard, ESA 2010, expenditure on Research and 

Development and purely military equipment (i.e. without possible civilian use) is treated as capital 
expenditure, whereas it was considered to be consumption under the previous statistical standard 
(ESA 95).
9 Second, the distinction between public and private investment is not always clear in practice, for example when private parties participate in infrastructure projects through PPPs with 
budgetary risks for the government posed by (explicit or implicit) guarantees. Third, the delineation 

between the public and private sectors also differs between countries, which partly explains the 

differences observed across Member States. Last, public capital stock data are not observed but 

are rather constructed, based on investment flow data, depreciation rates and an estimate of the 
initial public capital stocks.Alternative measures of (public) investment, e.g. physical measures, such as broadband penetration, the length of roads and railways or the number of fixed telephone lines, can only partly 
circumvent some of the limitations of investment (or capital stock) data. Significant limitations 
include the facts that the quality of infrastructure is often not correctly measured, including the 
question of valuations, and that comparable cross-country data are scarce and heterogeneous.With these caveats in mind, this article, as in most of the literature, uses the conventional measure of government investment as defined in national accounts. 9 For further information, see ﬁNew international standards in statistics Œ enhancements to methodology 
and data availabilityﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, August 2014.813 The contribution of public investment to growth
An increase in public investment can positively affect economic growth in two ways. First, an increase in public investment has positive effects on aggregate demand. In addition, efficient public investment can contribute to the economy™s 
productive capacity by increasing the stock of public capital. However, it is important 

to consider the cost and benefit of additional public capital carefully, taking into 

account the financing alternatives and their effects on output and public finances.
There is considerable uncertainty surrounding the size of short-term fiscal multipliers. Public investment is usually found to be an expenditure category with a relatively high short-term fiscal multiplier, but there is considerable uncertainty 

surrounding the size of the multipliers that are found to be country, time and episode-

specific.10 They are, for example, larger during recessions, but found to be smaller in 
the presence of weak public finances, particularly when debt sustainability is at risk. 
In addition, multipliers depend on how the expenditure is financed, whether through 
debt, increases in revenues or cuts in other expenditure categories.Empirical estimates of the effect of public capital increases on output tend to 
be positive but heterogeneous. Estimates based on production or cost functions 

typically find a (small) positive effect, but with considerable variation according to 

the time period, country, measure of capital and estimation method (see Chart 5). 

Estimates of the output elasticity of public capital taken from 68 papers published 

between 1983 and 2008 find an average output elasticity of 0.106, after correcting for 

a possible publication bias.11 The general conclusion from this strand of the literature 
10 For an overview, see ﬁFiscal multipliers and the timing of consolidationﬂ, 
Monthly Bulletin, ECB, April 2014, pp. 75-89.11 See, for example, Bom, P.R.D. and Ligthart, J.E., ﬁWhat have we learned from three decades of research on the productivity of public capital?ﬂ, Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 28, No 5, 2014, pp. 889-916.Chart 5Production function estimates of the output elasticity of public capital(frequency of estimates)050
100
150
200
250
-1.9-1.7-1.5-1.3-1.1-0.9-0.7-0.5-0.3-0.10.10.30.50.70.91.11.31.51.71.9
Source: Bom, P.R.D. and Ligthart, J.E., ﬁWhat have we learned from three decades of research on the productivity of public capital?ﬂ, 
Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 28, No 5, 2014, pp. 889-916.
82is that public capital supports the potential output level, in particular investment in core 
infrastructure, e.g. roads, railways and telecommunications. The positive contribution 

of public capital increases to growth shows a decline over time. This might be related 

to a downward trend in the marginal productivity of public capital in most developed 

countries, owing to the completion of infrastructure networks, such as roads or 

railways, rendering gains from additional investment smaller than in the past.12 Estimates of the impact of public investment that also consider the impact 

on public finances yield less positive results. The production and cost function 

approaches mentioned above highlight only the benefits of public investment or public 

capital. However, a government facing the decision of whether or not to invest more has 

to trade this additional investment off against lower public consumption expenditure, 

higher taxes or an increase in the debt level. Research based on VAR models, which 

take the trade-off between additional investment and its financing into account, often 

finds public capital to have a less positive effect on output growth than estimates based 

on production functions, and, in some cases, a neutral or even negative effect.
13 Structural models can provide more insight into the determinants of the 
effectiveness of additional investment and the conditions under which 
investment is more or less productive. For example, in a period of fiscal 
expansion, the output effect will be greater if the monetary policy authority does not 

respond by increasing its policy rate. Furthermore, studies that take into account 
implementation delays in investment find only slightly positive or potentially even 
negative responses in output and employment in the short run.14 However, rich 
structural models come at the price of imposing restrictions on the data, with public 
investment often assumed to be productive (and possible changes in productivity 
over time not accounted for). For example, model simulations are often conditional 
on choosing a positive output elasticity of public capital; by assumption, the output 
effect of public investment then outperforms that of public consumption.
15 4 Model simulations: what determ
ines the effectiveness  
of public investment?Given the considerable uncertainty surrounding past estimates of the growth impact of public investment, a comprehensive approach is called for 
when evaluating the macroeconomic and fiscal implications of an increase 
in public investment. T
o this end, this article utilises the Euro Area and Global 
12 See, for example, Pereira, A.M. and Andraz, J.M., ﬁOn the economic effects of public infrastructure investment: a survey of the international evidenceﬂ, Journal of Economic Development, Vol. 38, No 4, 2013, pp. 1-37.13 See, for example, Kamps, C., ﬁThe Dynamic Effects of Public Capital: VAR Evidence for 22 OECD 
Countriesﬂ, International Tax and Public Finance, Vol. 12, Issue 4, 2005, pp. 533-558.14 Leeper, E.M., Walker, T.B. and Yang, S-C.S., ﬁGovernment investment and fiscal stimulusﬂ, 
Journal of 
Monetary Economics, Vol. 57, Issue 8, 2010, pp. 1000-1012.15 A rare example of unrestricted estimation in a general equilibrium model, using a real business 

cycle model with US data, can be found in Ercolani, V. and Valle e Azevdo, J., ﬁThe effects of public 
spending externalitiesﬂ, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 46, Issue C, 2014,  pp. 173-199, which finds that public investment is unproductive.83Economy (EAGLE) model16, calibrated for Germany, the rest of the euro area, 
the United States and the rest of the world (see Box 3 for a short description of the fiscal block of the model). For illustrative purposes, this section considers a 
temporary increase in public investment in a large euro area country (Germany).17 More specifically, public investment is increased by 1% of the initial GDP over 20 

quarters, and thereafter gradually returns to the baseline level18. The additional 
investment is debt-financed, and the fiscal rule, based on the adjustment of non-
distortionary taxes, remains inactive during the first ten years of the simulation 
period. Since the government, by assumption, finances its debt at a risk-free rate, 
the possible credit risk premium effects of a deteriorating public debt outlook are 

ignored in these simulations. Moreover, the potential risk associated with higher 

public debt is not fed back to the balance sheets of those economic sectors that 
hold the debt. This is an important caveat when interpreting the results, particularly 

for countries in which sovereign debt sustainability cannot be taken for granted and 
where domestic financial institutions have large government bond holdings. In the 
benchmark simulation, the single monetary policy interest rate does not increase in 
response to the implied changes in the euro area macroeconomic developments (up 
to eight quarters following the shock). Importantly, the monetary policy stance is fully 

anticipated by households and firms.Box 3The fiscal block of the EAGLE modelWith a few exceptions, the government sector representation in the E
AGLE model is fairly standard in the context of general equilibrium macroeconomic models. Fiscal policy in the EAGLE model, unlike private sector behaviour, is not based on any explicit optimal decisions. Fiscal 
authorities set public expenditure proportional to nominal output, in line with the relevant long-term 
GDP ratios observed in the data. Similarly, on the revenue side, taxes are tied to the relevant tax 
bases via exogenous tax rates. The government may have a non-zero debt in equilibrium. The 

stability of government debt is ensured through an endogenous reaction in the non-distortionary 
taxes to deviations of the government debt-to-GDP ratio from its targeted value (the fiscal 

rule). Recent enhancement of the fiscal block, in line with Leeper et al. (2010),
19 enables public 
consumption and investment to play a greater role in affecting the optimal decision-making of the 

private sector.
 More specifically, the public capital stock is assumed to be an important factor of production; therefore, variation in public investment may have strong and persistent supply-
side effects. Intermediate-good production technology is formally specified as follows:Yt = z(KP,t)(KG,t)(Nt)(),16 Gomes, S., Jacquinot, P. and Pisani, M., ﬁThe EAGLE. A model for policy analysis of macroeconomic 
interdependence in the euro areaﬂ, Working Paper Series, ECB, No 1195, 2010.17 While the model is calibrated for Germany, the simulations should be considered illustrative of the 

economic channels involved, rather than country-specific.18 The baseline levels are characterised by the steady state (long-term equilibrium) of the model.
19 Leeper, E.M., Walker, T.B. and Yang, S-C.S., ﬁGovernment investment and fiscal stimulusﬂ, 
Journal of 
Monetary Economics, Vol. 57, Issue 8, 2010, pp. 1000-1012.84where Yt is the output, zt is the total factor productivity, 
KP,t
 and KG,t are the private and public capital stock respectively, 
Nt is the number of hours worked, and 
 and  are the output elasticity parameters of the private and public capital stock respectively. The public capital evolves by 
accumulating public investment net of depreciation:KG,t = ()KG,tIt, where G is the public capital stock depreciation rate and t is the public investment efficiency shock. 
The value of the output elasticity of the public capital stock determines the productivity of public capital (when  = 0, public investment does not feature any direct supply-side effects as the entire 
public capital stock is not productive). The variation in the investment efficiency shock controls the 

extent to which new investment expenditure contributes to the productive public infrastructure. The 

specific values of the parameters used in the baseline model simulations are similar to those used 
in Leeper et al. (2010):  = 0.30,  = 0.10, G = 0.025.Furthermore, private and public consumption goods are assumed to be complements, 
hence changes to public consumption may have persistent effects on private consumption. Households are assumed to derive utility from the consumption of a composite good consisting of 
private and public consumption goods:CCt = v  CP,t + (1 Œ v)  CG,t   11Œ1Œ1Œ1, where CCt is a composite consumption good, CP,t
 and CG,t are the private and public consumption goods respectively, 
v is the share of private goods in the consumption basket (when v =1, public consumption yields no utility to households) and  is the elasticity of substitution between government and private consumption ( 0 implies the government and private goods are perfect complements;  implies the government and private goods are perfect substitutes). The 

specific values of the parameters used in the baseline model simulations are in line with the euro 
area estimates reported in Coenen et al. (2013)20: v = 0.75 and  = 0.50. The investment increase has a positive short and longer-term impact on the 
domestic economy, but it is not self-financing, as it results in an increase in 

the public debt-to-GDP ratio over the longer term. The investment shock implies 
a large positive impact on domestic GDP, even in the short run (see
 Chart 6). Domestic inflation initially increases, in line with stronger demand and an 
unresponsive monetary policy. The implied real interest rate declines temporarily, 
thereby providing a further boost to private demand in the short run. Over the 
medium term, the positive production capacity effects of the shock strengthen 

and output expands further to around 1.8% above its baseline value. On the fiscal 
side, short-run inflationary pressure and an expansion of domestic demand result 
in a cyclical increase in tax revenues. This partially offsets the deterioration in the 
20 Coenen, G., Straub, R. and Trabandt, M., ﬁGauging the effects of a fiscal stimulus package in the euro 
areaﬂ, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 37, Issue 2, 2013, pp. 367-386. 85government deficit implied by a higher level of investment expenditure. As a result, 
the government debt-to-GDP ratio falls in the short run. However, because the deficit 

remains higher as long as the extra public investment is sustained, without additional 
fiscal adjustments the government debt ratio increases, albeit moderately, in the 

medium run.The simulations indicate a positive short-term output stimulus for the rest of the euro area. The public investment shock in the domestic economy has a 

positive spillover effect on the rest of the euro area economy, primarily owing to trade 

linkages. Higher import demand by the private sector and an increase in the relative 
price of domestic goods in the domestic economy contribute to stronger exports in 
the rest of the euro area. Financing investment with tax increases or expenditure cuts reduces the short-term output effect but improves the sustainability of public finances. If the increase in public investment is financed by an equivalent (ex ante) reduction in public consumption (1% of GDP), the positive demand effects of the public investment shock are largely neutralised in the short run. When the increase in 
public investment is matched by an equivalent (ex ante) increase in labour income 
taxes or consumption taxes, the positive demand effects of the public investment 

shock are estimated to be somewhat weaker in comparison with the benchmark 
results under debt financing. Higher labour income taxes harm domestic exports 
via the deterioration of international price competitiveness. The consumption tax 

increase negatively affects primarily private consumption via the reduced disposable 

real income channel. In addition, the distortionary impact of the labour income tax 
increase on labour utilisation has substantial negative output implications in the long 
run. As regards public finances, the use of tax instruments for financing higher public 

investment expenditure results in more favourable government deficit dynamics 
in the short run and implies a diminishing longer-term path of government debt. 
These results are based on the assumption that the government keeps expenditure, Chart 6Model simulations with various financing options to increase public investment(deviation from baseline; percentages)0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
year 1-2 averageyear 10
debt-financed (benchmark)
public consumption-financed 
labour income tax-financed 
consumption tax-financed 
domestic GDP0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
year 1-2 averageyear 10
rest of euro area GDP-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0

-0.5
0.0
0.5
year 1-2 averageyear 10
domestic public debt-to-GDP ratio
Source: ECB staff calculations.
86other than public investment, in line with the initial baseline level, and that revenues increase with the additional GDP growth. In other words, the additional tax revenues 

associated with the increase in economic activity from the investment shock are not 
used for additional expenditure but for public debt reduction.The monetary policy response plays a crucial role in the macroeconomic effects of a public investment increase, in particular the spillover to the rest 
of the euro area. If, unlike in the benchmark simulation, the monetary policy does 
not accommodate the shock but, instead, raises interest rates in response to the 
higher inflation risks posed by the short-term increase in demand, the pick-up in 
both private consumption and investment becomes more muted and this, in turn, 
limits output gains in the short run (see Chart 7). Under this scenario, there will 
be a less favourable public debt development over the entire simulation horizon. 
Moreover, an endogenous monetary policy reaction essentially neutralises the 

positive spillover effects of the shock on the rest of the euro area, since positive 

foreign trade effects are offset by higher real interest rates. Similarly, when the 

constant interest rate policy is not anticipated by the private sector (unanticipated 
accommodative monetary policy), the macroeconomic response is likely to be more 
gradual than under the benchmark scenario. Furthermore, when the monetary policy 
response places less emphasis on smoothing interest rates and greater emphasis 
on stabilising inflation and output, i.e. when there is a quicker return from a fixed 
interest rate policy to a normal monetary policy setting (ﬁaggressive normalisationﬂ), 
the domestic effects and the spillover to the rest of the euro area are estimated to be 

considerably smaller.
Lower investment efficiency and lower productivity of public capital reduce the positive impact of additional public investment. In the benchmark simulation, all new public investment is initially assumed to be added to the productive capital stock 
and the output elasticity of the public capital stock is assumed to be positive and Chart 7Model simulations with different monetary policy responses
(deviation from baseline; percentages)0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2

1.6
2.0
year 1-2 averageyear 10
anticipated accomodative monetary policy (benchmark)
endogenous monetary policy
unanticipated accomodative monetary policy
anticipated accomodative monetary policy, aggressive normalisation
domestic GDP-0.8
-0.4
0.0

0.4

0.8
1.2
year 1-2 averageyear 10
domestic public debt-to-GDP ratio
0.0
0.1

0.2

0.3
0.4
0.5

0.6
year 1-2 averageyear 10
rest of euro area GDPSource: ECB staff calculations.
87calibrated to 0.1. An alternative scenario of low investment efficiency, in which only 
half of the new public investment contributes to the reinforcement of the productive 
public infrastructure, results in a weaker stimulus for the domestic economy and the 
rest of the euro area (see Chart 8). A simulation of efficient investment with a zero 

output elasticity of public capital (which essentially implies that the public capital 
has no productive use) gives rise to an even stronger dampening effect.
 In this case, higher public investment would have only demand-side direct effects. There 

is still a positive, but lower, impact on output in the short run. However, it gradually 

diminishes in the medium run, as private consumption and investment are no longer 
growth-supportive. Hence, the cyclical upswing in tax revenues is limited and fiscal 
balances deteriorate significantly. The spillovers to the rest of the euro area are also 

considerably smaller. The positive effect from investment thus hinges on investment 

efficiency and the productivity of public capital.
5 Conclusions
Public investment in Europe has significantly declined since the crisis, 
although developments are heterogeneous across countries. This has led to 
calls to stimulate public investment in an environment of low borrowing costs for 
governments, weak economic growth and monetary policy at the lower bound. An increase in public investment has positive demand effects and can contribute to the economy™s potential output by increasing the stock of public capital. While the empirical literature on the effect of public capital on output typically 

finds a positive effect, estimates vary considerably according to the time period, 

country, measure of capital and estimation method. Similarly, the productivity of 

public capital increases may vary over time and could decline. Any increase in public 
Chart 8Model simulations with different degrees of investment efficiency and effectiveness 
of public capital(deviation from baseline; percentages)0.00
0.40

0.80
1.20
1.60

2.00
year 1-2 averageyear 10
benchmark simulation
low investment efficiency
low output elasticity of public capital
domestic GDP-0.80
-0.40
0.00
0.40
0.80

1.20
1.60
2.00
2.40
2.80
year 1-2 averageyear 10
domestic public debt-to-GDP ratio
-0.10
0.00
0.10

0.20
0.30
0.40

0.50
0.60
year 1-2 averageyear 10
rest of euro area GDPSource: ECB staff calculations.
88investment needs to be assessed in the light of its productivity, its financing and the 
relative costs and benefits of the financing options. Model simulations of an increase in public investment in a large euro area economy illustrate the sensitivity of the implied output and budget 
implications to alternative policy implementation strategies. First, an increase in public investment will have the strongest short-term demand effects, including in terms of spillovers to other countries, with an anticipated accommodative monetary 
policy. This finding strengthens the case for increasing public investment in the 

current low-inflation environment. Second, a debt or revenue-financed increase 
in productive public investment implies significantly larger short-term output 
gains compared with an increase in investment financed by cutting other public 
expenditure. However, when distortionary taxes, e.g. labour income taxes, are 

used to finance public investment, the short-term output gains of additional public 
investment have to be traded off against tax-induced output losses over the longer 

term, whereas any increase in public investment financed by higher public debt must 
be weighed up against possible fiscal sustainability concerns. Last, the longer-term 
positive effects on the economy™s potential output and the impact on public finances 

crucially depend on the effectiveness of investment and the productivity of public 

capital. If these are low, an increase in public investment is associated with a greater 

deterioration of the debt outlook and less persistent output gains. These findings 

underline the fact that economic considerations are important for ensuring a rigorous 
selection of productive investment projects.S 1StatisticsS 1ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - StatisticsContents 1 External environment
S 2 2 Financial developments
S 3 3 Economic activity
S 8 4 Prices and costs
S 14 5 Money and credit
S 18 6 Fiscal developments
S 23Further information ECB statistics can be accessed from the Statistical Data Warehouse (SDW): 
http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/ Data from the statistics section of the Economic Bulletin are available from the SDW: http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node=1000004813
 A comprehensive Statistics Bulletin can be found in the SDW: 
http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node=1000004045  Methodological definitions can be found in the General Notes to the Statistics Bulletin:http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node=10000023
 Details on calculations can be found in the Technical Notes to the Statistics Bulletin:http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node=10000022

html/glossa.en.htmlConventions used in the tables   
  -data do not exist/data are not applicable 

   
 .data are not yet available
   

 ...nil or negligible

   

 (p)provisional
   
 s.a.seasonally adjusted

   

 n.s.a.non-seasonally adjusted
S 21 External environmentS 2ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics1.1 Main trading partners, GDP and CPI         GDP 1)    CPI   (period-on-period percentage changes)   (annual percentage changes)G20UnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:   OECD countriesUnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:
StatesKingdom
euro areaStatesKingdom
euro area 2)Totalexcluding food
(HICP)(HICP)and energy12345
67
89101112
1320133.11.52.21.47.7-0.31.6
1.61.52.60.42.6
1.420143.32.42.9-0.17.3
0.91.7
1.81.61.52.72.0
0.42015. 2.42.20.56.9
1.60.6
1.70.10.00.81.4
0.02015 Q1 0.80.20.41.11.3
0.60.6
1.7-0.10.12.31.2
-0.3         Q2 0.81.00.6-0.41.9
0.40.5
1.60.00.00.51.4
0.2         Q3 . 0.50.40.31.8
0.30.5
1.70.10.00.21.7
0.1         Q4 . 0.30.5-0.31.6
0.30.7
1.80.50.10.31.5
0.22015 Sep. - - - - - - 0.4
1.80.0-0.10.01.6
-0.1         Oct. - - - - - - 0.6
1.80.2-0.10.31.3
0.1         Nov. - - - - - - 0.7
1.80.50.10.31.5
0.1         Dec. - - - - - - 0.9
1.90.70.20.21.6
0.22016 Jan. - - - - - - 1.2
1.91.40.30.01.8
0.3         Feb.  3) - - - - - - . . . . . . -0.2
Sources: Eurostat (col. 3, 6, 10, 13); BIS (col. 2, 4, 9, 11, 12); OECD (col. 1, 5, 7, 8).1) Quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted.
2) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
3) The figure for the euro area is an estimate based on provisional national data, which usually cover around 95% of the euro area, as well as on early information on energy prices.
               imports 1) 2)    Global 2)UnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:ManufacturingServicesNew exportGlobalAdvancedEmerging
StatesKingdom
euro areaorderseconomiesmarket
economies12345
678
910
1112
201353.454.856.852.651.549.7
52.252.750.63.1-0.15.4
201454.257.357.950.951.152.7
53.154.151.53.23.62.8
201553.355.856.351.450.453.8
51.753.950.31.13.8-0.9
2015 Q1 53.956.957.350.451.553.3
53.054.350.6-1.91.5-4.2
         Q2 53.355.957.251.351.153.9
51.154.149.6-0.9-0.9-0.9
         Q3 53.055.455.151.949.053.9
50.254.048.81.81.12.4
         Q4 52.755.055.452.349.954.1
51.353.250.50.70.31.0
2015 Sep. 52.355.053.351.248.053.6
49.953.248.11.81.12.4
         Oct. 52.755.055.352.349.953.9
51.253.350.91.82.31.4
         Nov. 53.356.155.752.350.554.2
51.853.850.70.11.1-0.7
         Dec. 52.254.055.352.249.454.3
50.952.649.80.70.31.0
2016 Jan. 52.253.256.252.650.153.6
51.052.750.1. . . 
         Feb. 50.050.052.851.049.453.0
49.850.048.9. . . 
Sources: Markit (col. 1-9); CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis and ECB calculations (col. 10-12).
1) Global and advanced economies exclude the euro area. Annual and quarterly data are period-on-period percentages; monthly data are 3-month-on-3-month percentages. All data
are seasonally adjusted.2) Excluding the euro area.S 32 Financial developmentsS 3ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics2.1 Money market interest rates(percentages per annum; period averages)   Euro area 1) United StatesJapanOvernight1-month3-month6-month12-month3-month3-monthdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdeposits(EONIA)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)
(LIBOR)(LIBOR)1234567
20130.090.130.220.340.540.270.1520140.090.130.210.310.480.230.132015-0.11-0.07-0.020.050.170.310.092015 Aug. -0.12-0.09-0.030.040.160.320.09         Sep. -0.14-0.11-0.040.040.150.330.08         Oct. -0.14-0.12-0.050.020.130.320.08         Nov. -0.13-0.14-0.09-0.020.080.370.08         Dec. -0.20-0.19-0.13-0.040.060.530.082016 Jan. -0.24-0.22-0.15-0.060.040.620.08         Feb. -0.24-0.25-0.18-0.12-0.010.620.01Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area, see the General Notes.2.2 Yield curves(End of period; rates in percentages per annum; spreads in percentage points)            Spot rates   Spreads   Instantaneous forward rates   Euro area 1), 2) Euro area 1), 2)United StatesUnited Kingdom
   Euro area 1), 2)3 months1 year2 years5 years10 years10 years10 years10 years1 year2 years5 years10 years
- 1 year- 1 year- 1 year
12345
6789101112
20130.080.090.251.072.242.152.91
2.660.180.672.533.88
2014-0.02-0.09-0.120.070.650.741.95
1.45-0.15-0.110.581.77
2015-0.45-0.40-0.350.020.771.171.66
1.68-0.35-0.220.821.98
2015 Aug. -0.25-0.27-0.220.140.821.091.84
1.46-0.25-0.070.861.97
         Sep. -0.36-0.27-0.240.040.700.971.73
1.24-0.22-0.170.731.76
         Oct. -0.35-0.33-0.31-0.030.630.961.82
1.40-0.32-0.250.661.69
         Nov. -0.41-0.40-0.40-0.130.580.981.73
1.34-0.41-0.360.581.77
         Dec. -0.45-0.40-0.350.020.771.171.66
1.68-0.35-0.220.821.98
2016 Jan. -0.45-0.45-0.47-0.230.440.891.47
1.18-0.47-0.460.431.55
         Feb. -0.50-0.51-0.54-0.360.220.731.14
1.01-0.54-0.560.181.23
Source: ECB.
1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area, see the General Notes.
2) ECB calculations based on underlying data provided by EuroMTS and ratings provided by Fitch Ratings.2.3 Stock market indices(index levels in points; period averages)   Dow Jones EURO STOXX indicesUnitedJapan
      States   Benchmark   Main industry indicesBroad50BasicConsumerConsumerOil andFinancialsIndustrialsTechnologyUtilitiesTelecomsHealth careStandardNikkei


5001234567891011121314
2013281.92,794.0586.3195.0468.2312.8151.5402.7274.1230.6253.4629.41,643.813,577.9
2014318.73,145.3644.3216.6510.6335.5180.0452.9310.8279.2306.7668.11,931.415,460.4

2015356.23,444.1717.4261.9628.2299.9189.8500.6373.2278.0377.7821.32,061.119,203.8
2015 Aug. 356.73,444.4711.9261.9615.0287.7193.9504.6359.9274.9390.0856.92,039.919,919.1
         Sep. 330.93,165.5649.6250.9566.4267.2178.5469.7339.5250.8362.6817.41,944.417,944.2
         Oct. 342.23,275.5658.6261.3598.9290.0183.4478.7360.4263.5362.3823.92,024.818,374.1

         Nov. 358.23,439.6703.0269.0640.1297.3187.0507.4394.1270.3385.3850.12,080.619,581.8

         Dec. 346.03,288.6652.5262.8630.2278.1180.2494.9391.7263.6363.3811.02,054.119,202.6
2016 Jan. 320.83,030.5589.3250.1584.0252.6161.6463.6379.6254.3345.1769.61,918.617,302.3
         Feb. 304.32,862.6559.2245.9569.1250.5144.0449.9352.5245.7332.8732.61,904.416,347.0
Source: ECB.S 42 Financial developmentsS 4ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics2.4 MFI interest rates on loans to and deposits from households (new business) 1), 2)(Percentages per annum; period average, unless otherwise indicated)            DepositsRevolvingExtended   Loans for consumptionLoans
   Loans for house purchase   loanscredit   
to sole   Over-Redeem-   Withandcard   By initial periodAPRC
 3)proprietors   By initial periodAPRC
 3)Compositenightable   an agreedoverdraftscredit   of rate fixation
and   of rate fixation
cost-of-at   maturity of:
unincor-borrowingnoticeFloatingOver
poratedFloatingOver 1Over 5Over
indicatorof upUp toOver
rate and1
partner-rate andand upand up10
to 322
up toyear
shipsup toto 5to 10years
monthsyearsyears
1 year1 yearyearsyears
12345678910111213141516
2015 Feb. 0.180.850.971.537.1317.055.186.476.822.792.092.512.352.482.582.37
         Mar. 0.170.830.891.247.1317.055.166.176.502.722.102.452.242.392.532.29

         Apr. 0.160.790.871.197.0317.014.896.136.422.662.012.382.172.362.492.23

         May 0.160.820.841.136.9817.085.046.296.602.672.052.332.102.292.452.17
         June 0.150.780.771.116.9717.024.886.156.472.592.032.272.122.312.482.18
         July 0.150.740.671.146.8317.085.106.206.532.612.052.252.212.362.562.22

         Aug. 0.140.670.671.006.8317.035.306.286.622.602.122.352.302.332.602.26

         Sep. 0.140.670.671.086.8517.065.216.186.552.682.072.362.292.382.612.25

         Oct. 0.140.660.650.996.7116.985.226.036.432.642.062.322.302.412.582.26

         Nov. 0.140.650.640.966.6816.915.236.226.602.682.042.312.322.452.622.27

         Dec. 0.130.640.640.986.6116.954.845.946.252.531.992.272.272.422.552.22
2016 Jan. (p)0.120.620.631.256.6516.875.316.306.652.531.982.232.302.412.522.23
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Including non-profit institutions serving households.
3) Annual percentage rate of charge (APRC).2.5 MFI interest rates on loans to and deposits from non-financial corporations (new business) 1), 2)(Percentages per annum; period average, unless otherwise indicated)         DepositsRevolving
   Other loans by size and initial period of rate fixationComposite   loans and
         cost-of-Over-   With an agreedoverdrafts   up to EUR 0.25 million   over EUR 0.25 and up to 1 million   over EUR 1 millionborrowing
night   maturity of:
indicatorFloatingOverOverFloatingOverOverFloatingOverOver
Up toOver
rate3 months1 yearrate3 months1 yearrate3 months1 year
2 years2 years
and up toand up to
and up toand up toand up toand up to
3 months1 year
3 months1 year
3 months1 year
1234567
891011121314
2015 Feb. 0.210.351.043.433.603.723.132.232.712.391.511.992.142.36
         Mar. 0.210.320.973.393.463.653.102.162.652.321.612.122.002.35

         Apr. 0.190.300.903.343.463.582.972.182.602.261.611.932.022.32

         May 0.180.300.913.283.373.502.972.152.462.231.561.852.042.25

         June 0.180.311.093.253.193.472.872.092.332.231.591.912.032.24

         July 0.170.320.863.193.273.602.872.072.362.201.501.732.042.17
         Aug. 0.170.240.923.163.253.572.912.072.322.231.391.532.032.13
         Sep. 0.170.260.983.203.233.512.892.032.252.211.491.872.172.20

         Oct. 0.160.260.803.093.183.422.892.042.282.201.431.692.022.14

         Nov. 0.160.230.843.053.143.392.882.022.162.201.371.621.982.09

         Dec. 0.140.230.853.013.073.182.772.012.132.171.431.771.922.06
2016 Jan. (p)0.130.260.782.973.223.252.782.002.222.181.391.682.072.09
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financial
corporations sector.S 52 Financial developmentsS 5ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics2.6 Debt securities issued by euro area residents, by sector of the issuer and initial maturity(EUR billions; transactions during the month and end-of-period outstanding amounts; nominal values)Short-term         Outstanding amounts   Gross issues 1)            TotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General governmentTotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General government
(including   
(including   
Euro-Financial
Non-CentralOther
Euro-Financial
Non-CentralOther
system)corporations
financialgovern-generalsystem)corporations
financialgovern-general
other thanFVCscorporationsmentgovern-
other thanFVCscorporationsmentgovern-
MFIsmentMFIsment12
34
56789
1011121314
20131,253483122.6752953508314
30.449921
20141,320544129.5953850409219
34.389325
20151,260521135.6147865334151
36.328234
2015 Aug. 1,341558130.7951559291132
28.227929
         Sep. 1,327545127.7552059345162
31.299330
         Oct. 1,339552144.7450960363172
31.328642
         Nov. 1,351559144.7350966311140
39.307526
         Dec. 1,260521135.6147865294133
50.275726
2016 Jan. 1,283527137.6848367325141
31.338733
Long-term201315,1074,4043,087.9216,06962722270
39.16899
201415,1274,0473,158.9946,28564322166
43.168510
201515,1713,7833,207.1,0656,48063721366
44.13818
2015 Aug. 15,2433,8923,232.1,0356,44763611242
19.
4444
         Sep. 15,2593,8643,236.1,0426,48563225764
82.14934
         Oct. 15,3313,8593,290.1,0486,49863623278
44.128910
         Nov. 15,3763,8693,277.1,0616,52564419667
34.166711
         Dec. 15,1713,7833,207.1,0656,48063715349
60.16234
2016 Jan. 15,1403,7493,186.1,0526,52063420275
21.
6938
Source: ECB.1) For the purpose of comparison, annual data refer to the average monthly figure over the year.2.7 Growth rates and outstanding amounts of debt securities and listed shares(EUR billions; percentage changes)Oustanding amount         Debt securities   Listed shares      TotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General governmentTotalMFIsFinancialNon-
(including   
corporationsfinancial
Eurosystem)Financial
Non-CentralOther
other thancorporations
corporationsfinancialgovernmentgeneral
MFIsother thanFVCscorporations
governmentMFIs1234
56789
1011
201316,360.74,886.53,209.1.987.46,598.1679.65,649.0569.1747.34,332.7
201416,446.44,590.63,287.3.1,052.46,823.2692.95,958.0591.1784.64,582.3

201516,430.84,303.83,341.6.1,126.16,957.8701.56,720.7586.1891.55,243.1
2015 Aug. 16,584.44,450.13,362.1.1,114.36,962.5695.36,576.6630.6848.45,097.6
         Sep. 16,585.94,409.63,363.2.1,116.97,004.9691.36,273.7582.5804.84,886.4

         Oct. 16,670.54,410.53,434.5.1,122.37,007.0696.36,812.7612.1873.05,327.6

         Nov. 16,727.24,428.13,420.5.1,134.47,034.0710.27,006.2613.9922.65,469.8

         Dec. 16,430.84,303.83,341.6.1,126.16,957.8701.56,720.7586.1891.55,243.1
2016 Jan. 16,422.94,276.03,322.9.1,119.57,003.4701.16,313.9490.7832.34,990.9
Growth rate2013-1.4-8.9-3.4.8.04.5-1.10.77.2-0.40.2
2014-0.6-7.80.4.5.13.11.21.47.21.00.7
2015-0.2-7.03.0.5.31.80.51.14.51.50.6
2015 Aug. -1.0-7.30.4.4.11.9-0.21.03.30.40.8
         Sep. -0.5-7.52.1.4.42.4-1.91.03.30.50.7

         Oct. 0.1-6.02.4.4.32.40.11.03.30.90.7

         Nov. 0.0-5.61.5.4.52.21.21.03.01.50.6

         Dec. -0.2-7.03.0.5.31.80.51.14.51.50.6
2016 Jan. -0.8-7.91.4.4.42.00.61.03.31.80.7
Source: ECB.S 62 Financial developmentsS 6ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics2.8 Effective exchange rates 1)(period averages; index: 1999 Q1=100)         EER-19   EER-38NominalReal CPIReal PPIReal GDPReal ULCM
 2)Real ULCTNominalReal CPI
deflator12345678
2013101.298.296.791.1102.098.8
111.995.6
2014101.897.996.791.3102.2100.4
114.796.1
201592.488.489.1. . . 106.587.9
2015 Q1 93.089.289.483.991.392.2
106.488.3
         Q2 91.287.588.282.390.090.1
104.486.4
         Q3 92.788.789.684.091.691.4
107.688.7
         Q4 92.488.489.3...107.788.4
2015 Sep. 93.889.790.7- - - 109.690.3
         Oct. 93.689.690.5- - - 109.089.7
         Nov. 91.187.188.1- - - 106.087.0
         Dec. 92.588.389.2- - - 108.088.5
2016 Jan. 93.689.190.2- - - 109.989.7
         Feb. 94.790.091.2- - - 111.391.0
Percentage change versus previous month2016 Feb. 1.21.01.2- - - 1.3
1.4Percentage change versus previous year2016 Feb. 1.50.61.6- - - 4.0
2.5Source: ECB.1) For a definition of the trading partner groups and other information see the General Notes to the Statistics Bulletin.
2) ULCM-deflated series are available only for the EER-18 trading partner group.2.9 Bilateral exchange rates(period averages; units of national currency per euro)ChineseCroatianCzechDanishHungarianJapanesePolishPoundRomanianSwedishSwissUS
renminbikunakorunakroneforintyenzlotysterlingleukronafrancDollar
123456789101112
20138.1657.57925.9807.458296.873129.6634.1970.8494.41908.6521.2311.328
20148.1867.63427.5367.455308.706140.3064.1840.8064.44379.0991.2151.329
20156.9737.61427.2797.459309.996134.3144.1840.7264.44549.3531.0681.110
2015 Q1 7.0237.68127.6247.450308.889134.1214.1930.7434.45169.3801.0721.126
         Q2 6.8577.57427.3797.462306.100134.2894.0880.7214.44429.3001.0411.105
         Q3 7.0087.57827.0757.462312.095135.8634.1880.7174.42909.4291.0721.112
         Q4 7.0007.62327.0577.460312.652132.9524.2640.7224.45739.3021.0851.095
2015 Sep. 7.1467.58927.0897.461313.145134.8514.2180.7314.42369.3921.0911.122
         Oct. 7.1357.62127.1057.460311.272134.8394.2510.7334.42279.3491.0881.124
         Nov. 6.8407.60727.0397.460312.269131.5974.2490.7074.44539.3131.0831.074
         Dec. 7.0197.64027.0277.461314.398132.3584.2900.7264.50339.2451.0831.088
2016 Jan. 7.1397.65827.0277.462314.679128.3244.4070.7554.53119.2831.0941.086
         Feb. 7.2667.63627.0407.463310.365127.3464.3970.7764.48149.4101.1021.109
Percentage change versus previous month2016 Feb. 1.8-0.30.10.0-1.4-0.8-0.22.8-1.11.40.72.1
Percentage change versus previous year2016 Feb. 2.4-1.0-2.10.21.1-5.45.34.71.1-0.83.8-2.3
Source: ECB.S 72 Financial developmentsS 7ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics2.10 Euro area balance of payments, financial account(EUR billions, unless otherwise indicated; outstanding amounts at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts (international investment position)               Total 1)    Direct   PortfolioNet   Other investmentReserveMemo:
      investment   investmentfinancial   
assetsGross
derivativesexternalAssetsLiabilitiesNetAssetsLiabilitiesAssetsLiabilities
AssetsLiabilities
debt123456789101112
2014 Q4 19,874.620,995.4-1,120.78,247.86,403.16,467.39,829.8-43.14,590.44,762.5612.312,048.4
2015 Q1 21,841.722,847.8-1,006.08,952.86,632.87,225.211,059.5-69.35,042.75,155.5690.413,008.1
         Q2 21,447.022,295.7-848.78,871.76,704.27,105.710,628.1-24.84,835.94,963.4658.512,653.2
         Q3 21,347.022,222.1-875.19,177.37,153.76,781.010,124.9-36.74,781.14,943.4644.212,668.6
Outstanding amounts as a percentage of GDP2015 Q3 206.9215.3-8.588.969.365.798.1-0.446.347.96.2122.8
Transactions2015 Q1 547.1511.735.5193.789.2137.1249.922.6187.9172.55.8-
         Q2 60.923.037.997.0139.7128.21.51.3-163.3-118.3-2.4-
         Q3 59.013.945.1106.4137.814.2-106.9-1.7-62.6-16.92.7-
         Q4 -117.8-215.297.442.640.2102.9-31.516.4-284.3-224.04.6-
2015 July 120.0130.9-10.882.795.414.9-63.69.919.599.1-7.0-
         Aug. -18.4-25.36.9-10.04.3-12.1-34.3-7.810.14.71.4-
         Sep. -42.6-91.649.033.838.111.4-9.0-3.8-92.2-120.78.3-
         Oct. 121.984.437.539.943.956.030.0-0.732.710.5-6.0-
         Nov. -32.2-51.118.9-4.9-4.527.0-3.29.8-66.5-43.42.5-
         Dec. -207.5-248.540.97.60.919.9-58.37.3-250.5-191.08.1-
12-month cumulated transactions2015 Dec. 549.3333.4215.9439.8407.0382.5113.138.6-322.3-186.710.7-
12-month cumulated transactions as a percentage of GDP2015 Dec. 5.33.22.14.23.93.71.10.4-3.1-1.80.1-
Source: ECB.1) Net financial derivatives are included in total assets.S 83 Economic activityS 8ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics3.1 GDP and expenditure components(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Current prices (EUR billions)   GDP      Total   Domestic demand   External balance 1)TotalPrivateGovernment   Gross fixed capital formation
Changes inTotalExports
 1)Imports 1)consumptionconsumption
inventories 2)TotalTotalIntellectual
constructionmachineryproperty
products12
345
67
89101112
20139,931.89,595.25,558.52,094.51,949.01,005.5573.7365.7
-6.8336.64,373.44,036.7
201410,106.49,732.95,631.12,128.51,984.61,008.1596.2375.3
-11.3373.64,521.34,147.8
201510,400.29,940.45,738.02,169.12,054.2
. . . -20.8459.74,751.04,291.3
2015 Q1 2,573.82,462.91,421.0538.3509.0256.0154.596.7
-5.4110.91,167.61,056.8
         Q2 2,591.72,473.51,433.0540.4510.1253.8155.199.5
-10.0118.21,196.81,078.7
         Q3 2,606.92,490.41,439.4543.0513.6253.6154.7101.2
-5.6116.51,195.21,078.7
         Q4 2,624.02,510.01,444.1546.4521.6
. . . -2.1114.01,192.51,078.4
as a percentage of GDP2015100.095.655.220.919.8
. . . -0.24.4- - 
Chain-linked volumes (prices for the previous year)quarter-on-quarter percentage changes2015 Q1 0.60.80.50.51.41.31.91.4
- - 1.42.1
         Q2 0.40.00.30.30.1-0.90.12.6
- - 1.71.0
         Q3 0.30.70.50.30.4-0.2-0.51.2
- - 0.21.2
         Q4 0.30.60.20.61.3
. . . - - 0.20.9
annual percentage changes2013-0.3-0.7-0.60.2-2.6-3.5-2.4-0.4
- - 2.11.3
20140.90.90.80.81.3-0.54.12.1
- - 4.14.5
20151.61.81.71.32.7
. . . - - 5.05.7
2015 Q1 1.31.41.61.12.00.14.82.6
- - 5.36.0
         Q2 1.61.41.71.22.60.64.45.0
- - 6.05.8
         Q3 1.61.91.81.22.50.52.26.8
- - 4.65.5
         Q4 1.62.21.51.63.4
. . . - - 3.65.3
contributions to quarter-on-quarter percentage changes in GDP; percentage points2015 Q1 0.60.80.30.10.30.10.10.1
0.2-0.2- - 
         Q2 0.40.00.20.10.0-0.10.00.1
-0.20.4- - 
         Q3 0.30.70.30.10.10.00.00.0
0.3-0.4- - 
         Q4 0.30.60.10.10.3
. . . 0.1-0.3- - 
contributions to annual percentage changes in GDP; percentage points2013-0.3-0.7-0.40.0-0.5-0.4-0.10.0
0.20.4- - 
20140.90.90.40.20.3-0.10.20.1
0.00.0- - 
20151.61.70.90.30.5
. . . 0.0-0.1- - 
2015 Q1 1.31.40.90.20.40.00.30.1
-0.2-0.1- - 
         Q2 1.61.31.00.30.50.10.30.2
-0.40.3- - 
         Q3 1.61.81.00.30.50.00.10.3
0.1-0.2- - 
         Q4 1.62.20.80.30.7
. . . 0.3-0.6- - 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Exports and imports cover goods and services and include cross-border intra-euro area trade.
2) Including acquisitions less disposals of valuables.S 93 Economic activityS 9ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics3.2 Value added by economic activity(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Current prices (EUR billions)   Gross value added (basic prices)Taxes lesssubsidiesTotalAgriculture,ManufacturingConst-Trade,Infor-FinanceRealProfessional,Public ad-Arts, enter-on
forestry andenergy andructiontransport,mationandestatebusiness andministration,tainmentproducts
fishingutilities
accom-and com-insurance
supporteducation,and other
modationmunica-
serviceshealth andservices
and foodtion
social workservices12345678
9101112
20138,927.3152.31,737.0458.11,680.2412.6442.31,030.6945.21,751.4317.61,004.5
20149,073.5146.71,756.9461.61,711.1417.6453.91,051.0968.01,781.8324.81,033.0

20159,329.3146.41,815.9469.81,771.3431.1456.41,075.81,008.21,821.1333.41,070.9
2015 Q1 2,312.636.1451.1117.1438.5106.3114.9265.7247.8452.582.5261.2
         Q2 2,324.236.2453.6116.4441.1107.4114.5267.6250.9453.583.0267.4
         Q3 2,337.736.7454.3117.0444.4108.3113.7270.5253.3456.083.6269.2

         Q4 2,351.737.4454.4118.7447.3109.2113.1271.9256.3459.284.2272.3
as a percentage of value added2015100.01.619.55.019.04.64.911.510.819.53.6
- Chain-linked volumes (prices for the previous year)quarter-on-quarter percentage changes2015 Q1 0.60.8
1.00.60.80.50.60.1
1.00.30.20.1
         Q2 0.30.3
0.4-0.50.40.90.10.1
0.90.10.31.0
         Q3 0.30.6
0.2-0.10.50.5-0.60.7
0.60.10.40.3
         Q4 0.20.5-0.51.00.30.80.30.3
0.60.20.41.2
annual percentage changes2013-0.23.2-0.6-3.3-0.82.5-2.51.1
0.30.4-0.5-1.1
20140.93.1
0.6-0.91.42.0-0.61.3
1.40.51.20.8
20151.50.8
1.80.32.02.70.81.1
2.70.81.12.6
2015 Q1 1.20.6
1.2-1.01.72.51.11.0
2.20.60.82.2
         Q2 1.50.6
1.80.12.13.11.30.7
2.70.81.02.6
         Q3 1.50.2
1.90.22.02.40.21.1
2.80.70.92.9
         Q4 1.52.2
1.10.91.92.70.41.2
3.10.71.32.7
contributions to quarter-on-quarter percentage changes in value added; percentage points2015 Q1 0.60.0
0.20.00.10.00.00.0
0.10.10.0
-          Q2 0.30.0
0.10.00.10.00.00.0
0.10.00.0
-          Q3 0.30.0
0.00.00.10.00.00.1
0.10.00.0
-          Q4 0.20.0-0.10.00.10.00.00.0
0.10.00.0
- contributions to annual percentage changes in value added; percentage points2013-0.20.1-0.1-0.2-0.20.1-0.10.1
0.00.10.0
- 20140.90.1
0.10.00.30.10.00.1
0.10.10.0
- 20151.50.0
0.30.00.40.10.00.1
0.30.10.0
- 2015 Q1 1.20.0
0.20.00.30.10.10.1
0.20.10.0
-          Q2 1.50.0
0.30.00.40.10.10.1
0.30.20.0
-          Q3 1.50.0
0.40.00.40.10.00.1
0.30.10.0
-          Q4 1.50.0
0.20.00.40.10.00.1
0.30.10.0
- Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.S 103 Economic activityS 10ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics3.3 Employment 1)(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Persons employed       Total   By employment
   By economic activity   status   Employ-Self-Agricul-Manufac-Con-Trade,Infor-FinanceRealProfessional,Public adminis-Arts,
eesemployedture,turing,struc-transport,mationandestatebusiness andtration, edu-entertainment
forestryenergytionaccom-andinsur-
supportcation, healthand other
andand
modationcom-ance
servicesandservices
fishingutilities
and foodmunica-
social workservicestion
12345678910
111213as a percentage of total persons employed2012100.084.915.13.415.46.424.82.72.71.012.7
23.87.02013100.085.015.03.415.36.224.82.72.71.012.9
24.07.02014100.085.114.93.415.26.024.82.72.71.013.0
24.17.1annual percentage changes2012-0.4-0.50.0-1.1-0.7-4.4-0.61.1-0.40.2
0.80.00.42013-0.7-0.6-1.0-1.6-1.3-4.2-0.80.3-1.0-1.9
0.30.2-0.220140.60.7-0.30.6-0.1-1.80.70.8-0.91.0
1.90.80.72014 Q4 0.81.0-0.20.20.3-1.40.90.6-0.51.6
2.40.81.82015 Q1 0.91.1-0.1-0.30.3-0.11.20.5-0.31.5
2.70.60.7         Q2 1.01.10.20.30.20.91.01.00.42.5
2.80.61.0         Q3 1.11.3-0.20.10.4-0.31.21.50.02.4
3.00.81.0Hours workedas a percentage of total hours worked2012100.080.020.04.415.77.225.82.82.81.012.4
21.66.32013100.080.119.94.415.76.925.82.92.81.012.5
21.86.32014100.080.319.74.415.76.725.82.92.71.012.7
21.96.3annual percentage changes2012-1.6-1.6-1.5-2.3-2.2-6.8-1.70.7-1.0-0.8
-0.3-0.5-0.82013-1.4-1.4-1.8-1.4-1.5-5.5-1.6-0.1-1.6-3.1
-0.8-0.4-1.420140.60.8-0.40.10.4-1.70.61.2-1.00.7
2.01.00.02014 Q4 1.01.20.10.71.0-1.10.81.4-0.81.6
2.90.91.22015 Q1 0.81.0-0.10.80.5-0.30.70.6-0.62.4
2.50.61.2         Q2 1.11.30.31.00.91.20.71.50.43.3
3.30.61.2         Q3 1.31.60.20.71.00.41.02.6-0.23.7
3.70.91.2Hours worked per person employedannual percentage changes2012-1.2-1.1-1.6-1.2-1.5-2.5-1.1-0.4-0.6-1.0
-1.1-0.5-1.22013-0.8-0.7-0.80.2-0.2-1.4-0.8-0.4-0.6-1.3
-1.0-0.5-1.220140.00.1-0.1-0.50.50.1-0.10.30.0-0.3
0.10.2-0.62014 Q4 0.10.10.40.50.70.4-0.10.8-0.30.0
0.40.1-0.62015 Q1 -0.10.00.01.10.2-0.3-0.50.2-0.30.9
-0.20.00.4         Q2 0.10.20.10.70.60.3-0.30.50.00.8
0.4-0.10.2         Q3 0.30.30.40.50.50.7-0.11.0-0.21.3
0.70.10.2Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Data for employment are based on the ESA 2010.S 11
3 Economic activityS 11ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics3.4 Labour force, unemployment and job vacancies(seasonally adjusted, unless otherwise indicated)LabourUnder-
   UnemploymentJobforce,employ-   
      vacancymillions 1)ment,   TotalLong-term
   By age   By genderrate 2)% ofunemploy-   
         labourMillions% ofment,   Adult
   Youth   Male   Femaleforce 1)labour% of
forcelabourMillions% ofMillions% ofMillions% ofMillions% of% of total
force 1)labourlabourlabourlabourposts
forceforceforceforce1234567891011121314
% of total  100.0  81.3 18.7 53.6 46.4  
in 2013              
2013159.3344.619.21212.05.915.62110.73.59224.310.29911.98.91312.11.5
2014160.3084.618.62411.66.115.21310.43.41223.79.92911.58.69511.81.7
2015. . 17.43010.9. 14.2759.73.15522.49.25410.78.17611.0. 
2015 Q1 160.0904.717.99411.25.914.75710.13.23722.79.56011.18.43411.41.7
         Q2 160.4614.617.68511.05.714.5079.93.17822.59.39710.98.28811.21.7
         Q3 160.5544.417.20210.75.314.0819.63.12022.39.12110.58.08110.91.6

         Q4 . . 16.83810.5. 13.7549.43.08522.28.93610.37.90210.7. 
2015 Aug. - - 17.21110.7- 14.0779.63.13422.49.12010.58.09210.9- 
         Sep. - - 17.05810.6- 13.9409.53.11822.39.04110.48.01710.8- 
         Oct. - - 16.95910.6- 13.8389.43.12122.39.00210.47.95610.7- 
         Nov. - - 16.80310.5- 13.7339.43.07022.18.90210.37.90110.7- 
         Dec. - - 16.75210.4- 13.6909.33.06322.18.90410.37.84910.6- 
2016 Jan. - - 16.64710.3- 13.6099.33.03722.08.80010.27.84710.6- 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Not seasonally adjusted.
2) The job vacancy rate is equal to the number of job vacancies divided by the sum of the number of occupied posts and the number of job vacancies, expressed as a percentage.
3.5 Short-term business statistics   Industrial productionCon-ECB indicator
   Retail salesNew      structionon industrial
passenger   Total   Main Industrial Groupingsproduc-new ordersTotalFood,Non-foodFuelcar regis-
   (excluding construction)   tionbeverages,trationstobaccoManu-Inter-CapitalConsumerEnergy
facturingmediategoodsgoods
goods1234567
8910111213
% of total100.086.033.629.222.514.7100.0100.0100.039.351.59.1100.0
in 2010             
annual percentage changes2013-0.7-0.7-1.0-0.6-0.4-0.8-2.3
-0.1-0.8-0.9-0.6-1.0-4.4
20140.81.71.21.82.6-5.51.7
3.31.20.32.20.03.8
20151.41.50.81.81.80.2-0.9
2.52.51.43.42.48.9
2015 Q1 1.61.1-0.11.12.44.6-1.7
1.12.41.13.42.29.0
         Q2 1.31.70.92.70.9-1.1-0.8
5.42.51.33.52.76.9
         Q3 1.82.10.92.52.70.0-1.2
2.23.22.23.93.19.4
         Q4 0.81.31.40.91.3-3.20.1
1.32.01.12.71.810.4
2015 Aug. 2.32.91.24.13.2-2.3-2.1
3.52.72.72.64.18.3
         Sep. 1.41.91.42.01.9-1.4-0.5
0.03.31.64.82.19.8
         Oct. 2.12.31.53.61.31.10.1
0.72.31.13.21.75.8
         Nov. 1.41.82.21.71.5-2.70.3
3.31.70.82.42.210.9
         Dec. -1.3-0.40.4-2.61.3-7.3-0.4
0.02.11.42.71.615.1
2016 Jan. . . . . . . . . 2.01.43.00.310.8
month-on-month percentage changes (s.a.)2015 Aug. -0.5-0.10.4-0.90.3-3.60.5
-1.60.10.6-0.21.6-0.5
         Sep. -0.2-0.40.0-0.3-1.41.7-0.8
-2.0-0.1-0.50.1-1.00.9
         Oct. 0.90.60.11.40.71.80.5
1.6-0.2-0.4-0.1-0.1-1.1
         Nov. -0.5-0.20.7-1.50.0-4.30.9
0.90.1-0.1-0.10.42.4
         Dec. -1.0-0.8-0.3-1.9-0.1-2.4-0.6
-0.20.60.60.50.85.0
2016 Jan. . . . . . . . . 0.40.50.70.11.5
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations, ECB experimental statistics (col. 8) and European Automobile Manufacturers Association (col. 13).
S 123 Economic activityS 12ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics3.6 Opinion surveys(seasonally adjusted)         (percentage balances, unless otherwise indicated)   (diffusion indices)      Economic   Manufacturing industryConsumerConstructionRetail   Service industriesPurchasingManu-BusinessComposite


indicatorIndustrialCapacityindicatorindicatorconfid-ServicesCapacityIndex (PMI)outputfor
(long-termconfidenceutilisation
enceconfidenceutilisationfor manu-
servicesaverageindicator(%)
indicatorindicator(%)facturing
= 100)123
456
789101112
1999-13100.0-6.180.8-12.8-13.6-8.66.7
- 51.052.452.952.7
201393.5-9.078.6-18.8-27.9-12.2-5.487.149.650.649.349.7
2014101.5-3.880.4-10.2-26.4-3.14.987.651.853.352.552.7
2015104.2-3.181.3-6.2-22.51.69.188.452.253.454.053.8
2015 Q1 102.6-3.981.1-6.2-24.8-1.55.788.251.452.653.653.3
         Q2 103.7-3.281.1-5.2-24.40.07.788.352.353.454.153.9
         Q3 104.5-2.981.3-7.0-22.53.010.488.452.353.654.053.9

         Q4 106.3-2.481.7-6.4-18.45.112.688.652.854.054.254.1
2015 Sep. 105.5-2.3- -7.0-22.24.312.4
- 52.053.453.753.6
         Oct. 106.1-1.981.5-7.5-20.16.512.388.752.353.654.153.9
         Nov. 106.0-3.3- -5.9-17.55.812.7
- 52.854.054.254.2
         Dec. 106.7-2.0- -5.7-17.62.912.8
- 53.254.554.254.3
2016 Jan. 105.1-3.181.9-6.3-19.02.711.588.552.353.453.653.6

         Feb. 103.8-4.4- -8.8-17.51.610.6
- 51.252.353.353.0
Sources: European Commission (Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs) (col. 1-8) and Markit (col. 9-12).3.7 Summary accounts for households and non-financial corporations(current prices, unless otherwise indicated; not seasonally adjusted)         Households   Non-financial corporationsSavingDebtReal grossFinancialNon-financialNetHous-ProfitSavingDebtFinancialNon-financialFinan-
ratioratiodisposableinvestmentinvestmentworthingshare
 3)ratioratio
 4)investmentinvestmentcing
(gross) 1)income(gross) 2)wealth(net)(gross)                                                             Percentage of      Percentage of netPercent-
      gross disposable   Annual percentage changes   value addedage of   Annual percentage changes
   income (adjusted)      GDP   12
34567891011
1213
201212.498.8-1.81.7-5.3-0.1-3.031.01.7133.41.6-6.61.1
201312.797.3-0.41.2-4.00.5-1.831.93.1131.22.3-1.01.0
201412.796.60.71.8
0.82.71.131.73.3131.91.6
3.21.0
2014 Q4 12.796.61.01.8
0.92.71.131.73.3131.91.6
1.31.0
2015 Q1 12.796.02.01.8-0.53.81.431.93.6133.92.4
2.21.4
         Q2 12.895.72.21.8-0.52.61.532.64.1133.22.9
3.11.6
         Q3 12.795.61.71.8
1.02.42.033.04.8132.63.4
2.81.8
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.1) Based on four-quarter cumulated sums of both saving and gross disposable income (adjusted for the change in the net equity of households in pension fund reserves).

2) Financial assets (net of financial liabilities) and non-financial assets. Non-financial assets consist mainly of housing wealth (residential structures and land). They also include
non-financial assets of unincorporated enterprises classified within the household sector.3) The profit share uses net entrepreneurial income, which is broadly equivalent to current profits in business accounting. 
4) Based on the outstanding amount of loans, debt securities, trade credits and pension scheme liabilities.S 133 Economic activityS 13ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics3.8 Euro area balance of payments, current and capital accounts(EUR billions; seasonally adjusted unless otherwise indicated; transactions)         Current account   Capital                  account 1)   Total   Goods   Services   Primary income   Secondary income   
CreditDebitNetCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebit
12345678910111213
2015 Q1 876.7796.879.9512.8437.5184.3169.4154.1130.425.559.58.77.5
         Q2 896.6817.179.5525.4444.8188.0171.8156.8141.626.458.99.637.3
         Q3 886.8810.376.5516.2434.1189.6174.0156.0144.025.058.29.63.9
         Q4 882.1804.178.0514.2432.1192.1176.2150.0136.425.959.314.07.1
2015 July 297.4271.725.8174.4145.762.858.152.148.58.119.43.31.4
         Aug. 293.6270.523.1170.2144.963.458.051.248.28.819.43.41.0
         Sep. 295.8268.127.7171.6143.563.457.952.747.38.119.43.01.5
         Oct. 297.6271.925.7172.5144.564.058.852.248.78.820.04.52.0
         Nov. 298.0271.026.9172.7145.264.658.651.847.38.919.93.91.8
         Dec. 286.6261.125.5169.0142.463.458.846.040.48.219.55.63.3
12-month cumulated transactions2015 Dec. 3,542.33,228.3314.02,068.51,748.4754.0691.5616.9552.5102.8235.941.955.7
12-month cumulated transactions as a percentage of GDP2015 Dec. 34.131.13.019.916.87.36.75.95.31.02.30.40.5
1) The capital account is not seasonally adjusted.3.9 Euro area external trade in goods 1), values and volumes by product group 2)(seasonally adjusted, unless otherwise indicated)Values (EUR billions; annual percentage changes for columns 1 and 2)            Total (n.s.a.)   Exports (f.o.b.)   Imports (c.i.f.)            TotalMemo item:   Total   Memo items:ExportsImportsIntermediateCapitalConsump-Manu-IntermediateCapitalConsump-Manu-Oil
goodsgoodstionfacturing
goodsgoodstionfacturing
goodsgoods123
45
678
91011
1213
2015 Q1 5.61.9509.1241.6105.3149.4422.0447.9260.270.2109.7315.255.4
         Q2 8.24.2513.4242.5105.4153.5428.6453.3265.470.4110.8317.360.0

         Q3 4.40.8507.0234.8104.7153.8422.3445.5254.669.8113.1316.551.0

         Q4 3.12.2508.5
. . . 424.2445.2
. . . 322.3. 
2015 July 7.00.9172.879.635.452.5143.6150.386.523.537.7106.418.2
         Aug. 5.52.7166.577.734.450.7137.9147.283.923.037.7103.917.0

         Sep. 0.8-0.8167.877.534.850.6140.8148.084.223.337.7106.215.8

         Oct. 0.4-0.6168.179.834.950.8142.6148.384.424.537.5107.116.1

         Nov. 5.84.1170.478.834.951.6140.5147.982.223.738.1107.314.4
         Dec. 3.43.4170.0
. . . 141.1149.0
. . . 108.0. 
Volume indices (2000 = 100; annual percentage changes for columns 1 and 2)2015 Q1 2.65.2118.9115.2120.7123.2118.9106.6106.6107.0105.9108.6105.9
         Q2 2.92.7117.1113.6118.9121.6118.0104.2104.2103.6104.8107.199.5
         Q3 1.13.2116.6111.8117.9122.6116.7105.8105.6104.8106.6107.399.4

         Q4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2015 June 7.96.7117.7113.8120.5122.4118.6105.6105.4103.9107.3109.197.3
         July 3.11.9118.8112.8119.6125.5119.0106.1105.0107.0108.0108.997.0

         Aug. 2.05.5114.9111.2115.5121.4113.9105.1105.3103.5105.7105.1100.5

         Sep. -1.72.4116.2111.3118.7121.1117.2106.2106.6103.8106.1108.0100.9

         Oct. -1.73.7117.1115.3118.7122.1118.8107.3108.1110.3105.9109.7103.7
         Nov. 3.37.5118.3114.4117.9122.2116.4107.3106.5105.4107.7109.795.5
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.initions.2) Product groups as classified in the Broad Economic Categories.S 144 Prices and costsS 14ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics4.1 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1)(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)            Total   Total (s.a.; percentage change vis-à-vis previous period)   Memo item:
   Administered pricesIndex:   TotalGoodsServicesTotalProcessedUnpro-Non-energyEnergyServices
2015foodcessedindustrial(n.s.a.)
Total HICPAdminis-
= 100Totalfoodgoods
excludingtered
excludingadministeredprices
food andpricesenergy12345678
91011
1213
% of total100.0100.069.756.643.5100.012.27.526.310.643.587.112.9
in 2015             
201399.51.41.11.31.4-
--
---
1.22.1
2014100.00.40.8-0.21.2-
--
---
0.21.9
2015100.00.00.8-0.81.2-
--
---
-0.10.9
2015 Q1 99.2-0.30.7-1.41.1-0.20.20.70.1-4.20.3
-0.51.2
         Q2 100.50.20.8-0.51.10.50.20.70.22.40.3
0.10.9
         Q3 100.00.10.9-0.81.20.00.10.40.1-2.50.4
0.00.8
         Q4 100.20.21.0-0.61.2-0.10.20.90.1-3.00.2
0.10.6
2015 Sep. 100.2-0.10.9-1.11.2-0.10.00.60.0-1.70.0
-0.20.7
         Oct. 100.30.11.1-0.81.30.10.10.60.1-0.50.1
0.00.7
         Nov. 100.20.10.9-0.61.20.00.1-0.40.00.00.0
0.10.6
         Dec. 100.20.20.9-0.51.1-0.20.1-0.70.0-1.80.0
0.20.6
2016 Jan. 98.70.31.0-0.31.2-0.20.1-0.40.1-2.70.0
0.40.3
         Feb.  2) 98.8-0.20.7. 1.0-0.10.3-0.4-0.1-1.30.1
. . 
         Goods   Services            Food (including alcoholic   Industrial goods   HousingTransportCommuni-RecreationMiscel-
   beverages and tobacco)      cationandlaneous
personalTotalProcessedUnpro-TotalNon-energyEnergy
Rentsfoodcessed
industrialfoodgoods14151617
1819202122232425
% of total19.712.27.536.9
26.310.610.66.37.43.114.97.5
in 2015            
20132.72.23.50.6
0.60.61.71.42.4-4.22.30.7
20140.51.2-0.8-0.5
0.1-1.91.71.41.7-2.81.51.3
20151.00.61.6-1.8
0.3-6.81.21.11.3-0.81.51.2
2015 Q1 0.30.50.1-2.3
-0.1-7.71.31.31.4-1.91.31.2
         Q2 1.10.71.8-1.3
0.2-5.31.21.21.2-0.91.41.2
         Q3 1.20.62.1-1.8
0.4-7.21.10.91.4-0.41.71.0
         Q4 1.40.72.6-1.7
0.5-7.21.21.01.1-0.11.51.2
2015 Sep. 1.40.62.7-2.4
0.3-8.91.21.01.4-0.11.61.1
         Oct. 1.60.63.2-2.1
0.6-8.51.21.11.4-0.11.81.2
         Nov. 1.50.72.7-1.7
0.6-7.31.21.01.2-0.21.31.2
         Dec. 1.20.72.0-1.3
0.5-5.81.21.00.7-0.11.51.2
2016 Jan. 1.00.81.4-1.0
0.7-5.41.11.00.80.01.61.2
         Feb.  2) 0.70.90.3. 0.3-8.0. . . . . . 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Estimate based on provisional national data, which usually cover around 95% of the euro area, as well as on early information on energy prices.
S 154 Prices and costsS 15ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics4.2 Industry, construction and property prices(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)   Industrial producer prices excluding constructionCon-ResidentialExperimental
      structionpropertyindicator of
Total   Total
   Industry excluding construction and energyEnergy
prices 1)commercial(index:   property2010 = 100)Manu-TotalIntermediateCapital   Consumer goods
prices 1)facturinggoodsgoods
TotalFood,Non-
beveragesfood
and tobacco1234
567
891011
1213% of total100.0100.078.072.129.320.022.713.88.927.9   
in 2010             
2013108.5-0.2-0.10.4-0.60.61.72.60.3-1.60.3
-1.9-1.12014106.9-1.5-0.9-0.3-1.10.40.1-0.20.3-4.40.3
0.21.12015104.0-2.7-2.3-0.5-1.30.7-0.6-1.00.2-8.10.2
. . 2015 Q1 104.5-2.9-2.6-0.6-1.50.7-0.7-1.30.2-8.50.2
1.12.5         Q2 104.9-2.1-1.6-0.3-0.70.7-0.8-1.40.1-6.50.4
1.13.6         Q3 104.0-2.6-2.6-0.5-1.10.6-0.6-1.10.1-8.30.2
1.55.1         Q4 102.7-3.1-2.5-0.7-2.00.6-0.2-0.40.2-9.40.0
. . 2015 Aug. 103.8-2.6-2.7-0.5-1.10.6-0.7-1.20.2-8.2- - - 
         Sep. 103.5-3.2-3.0-0.6-1.60.6-0.4-0.70.2-10.0- - - 
         Oct. 103.1-3.2-2.8-0.7-1.90.6-0.1-0.30.2-9.8- - - 
         Nov. 102.9-3.2-2.5-0.7-2.10.6-0.2-0.40.2-9.3- - - 
         Dec. 102.1-3.0-2.1-0.7-1.90.6-0.3-0.40.2-8.9- - - 
2016 Jan. 101.0-2.9-1.9-0.6-1.60.4-0.1-0.20.2-8.6- - - 
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations, and ECB calculations based on MSCI data and national sources (col. 13).1) Experimental data based on non-harmonised sources (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/html/experiment.en.html for further details).
4.3 Commodity prices and GDP deflators(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)   GDP deflatorsOil prices   Non-energy commodity prices  (EUR)
   (EUR per      TotalTotal   Domestic demand
Exports 1)Imports 1)barrel)   Import-weighted
 2)   Use-weighted 2)(s.a.;index:TotalPrivateGovern-Gross
TotalFoodNon-foodTotalFoodNon-food
2010consump-mentfixed
= 100)tionconsump-capital
tionformation
123456789101112131415
% of total         100.035.065.0100.045.055.0
               
2013103.71.30.91.11.20.4-0.4-1.381.7-9.0-13.3-6.9-8.2-9.9-6.9
2014104.50.90.50.50.80.5-0.7-1.774.5-8.8-1.8-12.1-4.70.4-8.7

2015105.81.20.30.20.60.70.1-2.148.3-4.15.2-9.0-0.84.8-5.6
2015 Q1 105.41.10.1-0.10.60.7-0.2-2.649.0-0.48.7-4.95.611.60.7
         Q2 105.71.30.40.30.60.90.9-1.157.4-0.62.0-2.03.95.42.6
         Q3 106.01.30.30.30.50.70.1-2.346.1-6.56.4-13.1-3.35.7-10.6

         Q4 106.41.30.40.30.60.7-0.3-2.440.7-9.13.9-16.2-9.3-3.0-14.8
2015 Sep. - - - - - - - - 43.3-7.93.8-13.8-6.02.3-12.6
         Oct. - - - - - - - - 43.9-8.33.7-14.6-6.90.8-13.3
         Nov. - - - - - - - - 42.8-8.06.2-15.6-8.5-1.4-14.7
         Dec. - - - - - - - - 35.7-11.11.8-18.5-12.5-8.0-16.5
2016 Jan. - - - - - - - - 29.7-14.9-3.8-21.2-14.7-9.7-19.3
         Feb. - - - - - - - - 31.0-14.3-5.4-19.5-14.1-9.4-18.3
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations and Thomson Reuters (col. 9).1) Deflators for exports and imports refer to goods and services and include cross-border trade within the euro area.
2) Import-weighted: weighted according to 2004-06 average import structure; use-weighted: weighted according to 2004-06 average domestic demand structure.
S 164 Prices and costsS 16ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics4.4 Price-related opinion surveys(seasonally adjusted)         (percentage balances)   (diffusion indices)            Selling price expectationsConsumer   Input prices
   Prices charged   (for next three months)price trends      over pastManu-Retail tradeServicesConstruction12 monthsManu-ServicesManu-Services
facturingfacturingfacturing123456789
1999-134.7- - -2.1
34.057.756.7
- 49.92014-0.9-1.51.0
-17.214.249.653.549.748.2
2015-2.81.42.5
-13.3-1.148.953.549.649.0
2016. . . . . . . . . 
2015 Q1 -5.6-0.71.2
-16.9-2.545.852.548.847.6
         Q2 -1.33.22.9
-15.0-0.954.754.450.449.0
         Q3 -2.01.12.2
-12.5-0.249.553.649.949.9
         Q4 -2.11.93.7
-8.6-0.845.653.649.249.6
2015 Sep. -3.5-0.62.7
-11.9-1.644.653.548.750.4
         Oct. -2.42.04.6
-10.1-2.344.354.048.649.9
         Nov. -0.82.44.1
-8.7-0.545.653.349.349.6
         Dec. -3.21.32.3
-7.10.347.053.549.849.4
2016 Jan. -4.10.33.2
-8.0-0.942.152.748.349.1
         Feb. -5.51.73.2
-10.5-1.440.852.447.648.9
Sources: European Commission (Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs) and Markit.4.5 Labour cost indices(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)      TotalTotal   By component
   For selected economic activitiesMemo item:
(index:Indicator of
salariescontributions
economywages
 1)1234567
% of total100.0100.074.625.469.330.7 in 2012       
2013101.41.51.51.11.21.91.82014102.71.31.31.31.31.31.72015. . . . . 
. 1.52015 Q1 97.61.92.11.12.01.51.5         Q2 108.21.62.00.31.61.41.5         Q3 101.61.11.40.11.20.81.5         Q4 . . . . . 
. 1.5Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Experimental data based on non-harmonised sources (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/intro/html/experiment.en.html for further details).
S 174 Prices and costsS 17ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics4.6 Unit labour costs, compensation per labour input and labour productivity(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated; quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Unit labour costs TotalTotal
   By economic activity(index:2010Agriculture,Manu-Con-Trade,InformationFinanceRealProfessional,Public ad-Arts, enter-
=100)forestryfacturing,structiontransport,and commu-andestatebusiness andministration,tainment
and fishingenergy and
accom-nicationinsurance
supporteducation,and other
utilitiesmodation andserviceshealth andservices
food servicessocial work12
345
6789
1011122012102.51.92.62.14.0
1.70.41.20.9
3.30.82.8
2013103.71.2-1.12.10.4
0.9-1.43.6-2.8
1.01.42.0
2014104.81.1-3.81.50.7
0.71.01.01.2
2.31.20.6
2014 Q4 105.21.3-1.12.21.1
0.71.21.42.0
2.41.41.0
2015 Q1 105.20.80.10.91.8
0.6-0.20.13.5
2.31.00.4
         Q2 105.40.61.00.41.4
0.30.20.63.3
1.31.00.6
         Q3 105.60.51.4-0.10.6
0.40.91.73.2
1.31.00.2
Compensation per employee 2012103.61.50.21.92.4
1.71.40.90.9
1.90.81.6
2013105.21.63.82.81.2
0.90.82.00.2
1.01.71.7
2014106.71.4-1.42.21.7
1.42.11.41.5
1.70.91.1
2014 Q4 107.31.4-1.22.11.3
1.32.72.11.5
1.71.10.3
2015 Q1 107.71.20.91.90.9
1.01.81.53.0
1.81.00.5
         Q2 107.91.31.31.90.6
1.42.41.41.5
1.21.10.6
         Q3 108.11.11.51.41.2
1.21.71.82.0
1.10.90.1
Labour productivity per person employed2012101.0-0.4-2.3-0.3-1.5
0.01.1-0.30.0-1.4
0.0-1.2
2013101.40.44.90.70.8
-0.12.2-1.53.0
0.10.2-0.3
2014101.70.32.50.61.0
0.71.10.40.3-0.5
-0.30.5
2014 Q4 102.00.1-0.1-0.10.2
0.61.50.7-0.5-0.7
-0.3-0.7
2015 Q1 102.40.40.91.0-0.9
0.52.11.4-0.5-0.5
0.00.1
         Q2 102.40.60.31.5-0.7
1.12.10.9-1.7-0.1
0.10.0
         Q3 102.40.60.11.40.6
0.80.90.1-1.2-0.2
-0.1-0.1
Compensation per hour worked 2012104.82.62.23.35.0
2.91.71.21.4
2.91.32.8
2013107.22.33.72.92.6
1.80.92.61.6
2.22.12.9
2014108.61.3-0.71.71.5
1.51.71.31.3
1.30.71.8
2014 Q4 109.11.2-1.01.50.9
1.41.82.21.3
1.21.01.0
2015 Q1 109.41.30.91.70.5
1.51.02.02.6
2.01.0-0.3
         Q2 109.51.10.41.4-0.1
1.51.41.60.4
0.81.20.4
         Q3 109.60.81.00.80.0
1.10.72.21.5
0.60.9-0.3
Hourly labour productivity2012102.30.8-1.11.21.0
1.21.50.31.0-0.2
0.50.0
2013103.51.24.70.92.3
0.72.6-1.04.4
1.10.70.9
2014103.80.33.00.20.9
0.80.80.40.6-0.6
-0.51.2
2014 Q4 103.80.0-0.6-0.7-0.1
0.70.81.0-0.5-1.1
-0.4-0.1
2015 Q1 104.20.5-0.20.8-0.6
1.01.91.7-1.4-0.3
0.0-0.3
         Q2 104.20.5-0.40.9-1.1
1.41.60.9-2.5-0.5
0.2-0.2
         Q3 104.10.3-0.40.9-0.1
1.0-0.20.3-2.5-0.9
-0.2-0.3
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.S 185 Money and creditS 18ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics5.1 Monetary aggregates 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)
Outstanding amounts   M3         M2   M3-M2            M1   M2-M1   CurrencyOvernight
DepositsDeposits
ReposMoneyDebt
indeposits
with anredeemable
marketsecurities
circulationagreedat notice
fundwith
maturityof up to
sharesa maturity
of up to3 months
of up to2 years2 years123456789101112
2013909.74,476.35,386.11,683.32,142.83,826.19,212.1121.4418.186.5626.09,838.1
2014968.54,952.35,920.81,598.52,148.83,747.29,668.1123.9427.7104.7656.310,324.3
20151,034.55,569.86,604.31,447.52,160.63,608.110,212.477.1479.271.0627.410,839.8
2015 Q1 993.55,154.96,148.41,529.12,149.93,679.19,827.5125.8437.596.6659.910,487.4
         Q2 1,014.05,298.76,312.61,480.12,160.53,640.79,953.390.3441.198.6629.910,583.2
         Q3 1,028.25,425.16,453.31,449.32,164.43,613.710,067.098.4457.673.3629.210,696.2

         Q4 1,034.55,569.86,604.31,447.52,160.63,608.110,212.477.1479.271.0627.410,839.8
2015 Aug. 1,025.05,383.66,408.61,460.52,163.93,624.310,032.9102.4446.280.4629.010,661.9
         Sep. 1,028.25,425.16,453.31,449.32,164.43,613.710,067.098.4457.673.3629.210,696.2

         Oct. 1,029.95,487.76,517.61,438.52,164.33,602.810,120.4106.8473.576.9657.110,777.5

         Nov. 1,037.45,544.36,581.81,448.32,162.63,610.810,192.691.5485.282.0658.710,851.3

         Dec. 1,034.55,569.86,604.31,447.52,160.63,608.110,212.477.1479.271.0627.410,839.8
2016 Jan. (p)1,044.55,622.76,667.21,448.62,156.83,605.410,272.687.6471.178.2636.810,909.4
Transactions201345.6250.4295.9-114.445.5-68.9227.0-11.6-48.7-63.3-123.6103.4
201458.2379.3437.5-90.93.2-87.7349.81.010.812.724.6374.4
201564.8576.6641.4-143.312.0-131.3510.1-47.849.6-26.4-24.7485.4
2015 Q1 23.8166.6190.4-56.92.0-54.8135.60.65.6-9.3-3.0132.6
         Q2 20.5151.9172.3-47.610.9-36.7135.6-35.23.63.9-27.6108.0

         Q3 14.3129.0143.3-35.33.1-32.3111.08.218.7-18.48.4119.4

         Q4 6.3129.1135.4-3.5-4.0-7.5127.9-21.521.7-2.6-2.4125.5
2015 Aug. 4.724.529.2-9.42.3-7.122.1-2.32.2-2.6-2.619.5
         Sep. 3.242.645.9-12.2-0.4-12.633.3-4.11.3-3.9-6.626.7

         Oct. 1.749.451.1-12.1-0.2-12.338.78.216.04.428.667.4
         Nov. 7.648.355.87.4-1.95.561.3-15.711.85.21.362.6
         Dec. -3.031.428.51.2-1.9-0.627.8-14.0-6.1-12.2-32.3-4.5
2016 Jan. (p)10.154.965.01.4-3.7-2.362.710.5-2.84.612.475.1
Growth rates20135.35.95.8-6.42.2-1.82.5-9.2-10.4-38.0-16.11.0
20146.48.48.1-5.40.1-2.33.80.82.618.74.03.8
20156.711.610.8-9.00.6-3.55.3-38.211.5-26.2-3.84.7
2015 Q1 7.310.610.1-7.60.1-3.34.65.15.311.75.64.7
         Q2 8.812.411.8-10.70.5-4.45.2-30.96.923.70.64.9

         Q3 8.312.411.7-11.40.5-4.75.2-23.09.0-1.50.74.9

         Q4 6.711.610.8-9.00.6-3.55.3-38.211.5-26.2-3.84.7
2015 Aug. 8.612.111.5-11.20.6-4.65.1-21.19.58.22.44.9
         Sep. 8.312.411.7-11.40.5-4.75.2-23.09.0-1.50.74.9

         Oct. 8.112.311.6-10.90.6-4.35.4-18.810.16.63.25.2
         Nov. 8.011.711.1-9.90.3-4.05.2-29.612.37.32.75.0
         Dec. 6.711.610.8-9.00.6-3.55.3-38.211.5-26.2-3.84.7
2016 Jan. (p)6.111.310.5-7.50.7-2.75.4-28.09.4-16.2-1.35.0
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.S 195 Money and creditS 19ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics5.2 Deposits in M3 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)
Outstanding amounts          Non-financial corporations 2)    Households 3) FinancialInsuranceOther
corpor-corpor-general
TotalOvernightWith anRedeem-ReposTotalOvernightWith anRedeem-Reposationsationsgovern-
agreedable
agreedable
other thanandment
 4)maturityat notice
maturityat notice
MFIs andpension
of up toof up to
of up toof up to
ICPFs 2)funds2 years3 months
2 years3 months
12345678910111213
20131,710.51,186.7397.8109.816.25,413.62,539.7874.71,994.54.7804.8194.9300.1
20141,815.21,318.7365.8111.619.25,556.62,751.2809.61,992.83.0895.8222.7333.1

20151,927.61,480.9322.0116.58.25,751.13,061.0694.31,993.12.6989.2224.6362.5
2015 Q1 1,848.51,381.7340.2111.814.95,597.82,839.3762.81,991.93.8947.6225.7340.2
         Q2 1,858.21,410.7322.6112.812.25,646.72,910.7735.11,998.12.8955.7228.1340.9

         Q3 1,901.01,451.1324.0115.810.15,695.42,987.9707.41,997.03.0966.6218.0356.2

         Q4 1,927.61,480.9322.0116.58.25,751.13,061.0694.31,993.12.6989.2224.6362.5
2015 Aug. 1,889.41,441.7325.0114.58.25,674.02,960.0714.81,996.23.1968.1224.7354.2
         Sep. 1,901.01,451.1324.0115.810.15,695.42,987.9707.41,997.03.0966.6218.0356.2

         Oct. 1,937.31,493.6316.7116.910.15,706.83,003.6705.61,994.23.5964.5222.4366.1

         Nov. 1,934.21,486.9321.4116.89.15,728.03,033.3698.51,992.23.9990.4222.4371.7
         Dec. 1,927.61,480.9322.0116.58.25,751.13,061.0694.31,993.12.6989.2224.6362.5
2016 Jan. (p)1,966.41,520.9320.1115.69.85,763.93,077.2693.91,989.23.6983.3224.2378.1
Transactions201398.290.1-6.99.15.9107.9182.4-100.131.9-6.2-15.1-13.3-7.8
201469.591.2-25.51.52.4140.5209.8-65.7-1.8-1.753.47.521.7
2015100.0140.2-33.94.9-11.2194.8302.8-108.20.7-0.476.5-1.727.9
2015 Q1 29.548.9-14.90.1-4.639.079.1-41.10.20.835.01.57.5
         Q2 13.331.7-16.81.0-2.650.773.3-28.06.4-1.012.32.80.9

         Q3 42.541.00.43.1-2.148.978.3-27.7-1.90.210.3-10.213.4

         Q4 14.718.6-2.60.7-2.056.272.1-11.4-4.0-0.518.94.26.1
2015 Aug. 2.85.80.70.7-4.411.018.3-7.40.1-0.12.3-7.26.2
         Sep. 12.49.5-0.41.42.021.328.9-7.3-0.2-0.1-3.0-6.61.9

         Oct. 25.231.9-7.81.10.010.615.0-2.0-2.90.5-4.54.59.5
         Nov. -7.6-10.03.8-0.1-1.221.428.6-5.5-2.10.421.1-2.45.5
         Dec. -2.9-3.31.5-0.3-0.824.128.4-3.91.0-1.32.32.1-8.8
2016 Jan. (p)40.341.1-1.5-0.91.613.116.3-0.1-4.01.0-5.3-0.515.4
Growth rates20136.18.2-1.78.956.42.07.7-10.31.6-56.7-1.9-6.4-2.5
20144.07.6-6.41.314.42.68.3-7.5-0.1-36.96.34.07.3
20155.510.6-9.54.4-57.93.511.0-13.40.0-14.28.4-0.88.3
2015 Q1 4.79.9-9.80.8-5.42.89.7-11.20.0-31.214.6-0.55.2
         Q2 4.310.6-13.91.3-23.53.010.8-13.90.1-37.813.7-1.15.3

         Q3 5.110.8-12.32.3-32.33.011.1-15.50.0-37.714.2-4.95.8

         Q4 5.510.6-9.54.4-57.93.511.0-13.40.0-14.28.4-0.88.3
2015 Aug. 4.811.2-13.31.6-48.22.910.9-15.30.1-36.914.5-5.66.1
         Sep. 5.110.8-12.32.3-32.33.011.1-15.50.0-37.714.2-4.95.8

         Oct. 6.612.2-11.52.4-26.43.111.0-14.80.0-25.610.8-3.79.8
         Nov. 5.010.0-11.01.9-31.73.310.9-14.50.1-18.19.7-4.710.9
         Dec. 5.510.6-9.54.4-57.93.511.0-13.40.0-14.28.4-0.88.3
2016 Jan. (p)6.510.8-9.04.4-17.43.710.5-11.40.2-12.49.2-3.29.9
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financial
corporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).
3) Including non-profit institutions serving households.
4) Refers to the general government sector excluding central government.S 205 Money and creditS 20ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics5.3 Credit to euro area residents 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)
Outstanding amounts         Credit to general government   Credit to other euro area residentsTotalLoansDebtTotal
   LoansDebtEquity and
securities   securitiesnon-money
   TotalTo non-To house-To financialTo insurance
market fundfinancialholds
 4)corporationscorporations
investmentAdjusted forcorpor-
other thanand pension
fund sharesloan salesations
 3)MFIs andfunds
and securi-ICPFs 3)tisation 2)12345
678
91011
1220133,404.91,096.72,308.212,709.110,544.410,929.54,353.65,222.8869.298.71,364.7800.0
20143,605.51,131.82,473.712,562.310,510.710,920.74,271.75,200.4909.8128.91,276.9774.7

20153,893.31,109.52,783.912,679.610,591.710,989.34,273.45,307.5887.3123.61,301.1786.8
2015 Q1 3,671.71,148.52,523.212,674.110,611.811,008.54,301.55,234.0941.6134.71,274.1788.2
         Q2 3,680.41,137.42,543.012,636.410,592.210,986.54,291.35,258.5906.8135.51,254.8789.4

         Q3 3,815.91,127.12,688.812,652.510,564.810,963.14,274.95,277.6891.1121.21,310.4777.3
         Q4 3,893.31,109.52,783.912,679.610,591.710,989.34,273.45,307.5887.3123.61,301.1786.8
2015 Aug. 3,766.91,132.32,634.612,697.110,599.311,000.94,291.15,268.8910.8128.61,306.1791.7
         Sep. 3,815.91,127.12,688.812,652.510,564.810,963.14,274.95,277.6891.1121.21,310.4777.3
         Oct. 3,835.61,119.82,715.812,695.510,607.111,003.34,290.25,301.9890.6124.31,296.6791.8

         Nov. 3,877.81,118.42,759.412,736.010,650.211,046.64,307.55,310.0908.3124.41,287.6798.2

         Dec. 3,893.31,109.52,783.912,679.610,591.710,989.34,273.45,307.5887.3123.61,301.1786.8
2016 Jan. (p)3,963.71,117.32,846.412,687.910,617.111,013.24,289.15,311.7890.6125.61,306.0764.9
Transactions2013-25.0-73.548.5-305.7-248.1-268.7-132.9-4.0-120.99.7-72.715.1
201472.016.056.1-104.0-50.3-32.1-60.9-15.414.311.7-90.036.2
2015283.8-20.7304.697.668.849.00.698.0-24.3-5.524.24.5
2015 Q1 40.316.523.834.145.231.78.319.212.45.3-3.5-7.5
         Q2 58.0-10.768.60.27.61.6-0.330.7-23.81.0-14.16.7

         Q3 112.2-10.2122.354.8-7.9-2.8-6.024.7-12.3-14.464.3-1.6

         Q4 73.4-16.489.88.423.918.5-1.423.4-0.72.6-22.47.0
2015 Aug. 47.1-0.147.115.23.84.5-0.89.1-1.5-3.012.1-0.7
         Sep. 35.0-6.141.1-29.7-26.0-27.4-10.411.4-19.6-7.45.6-9.3

         Oct. 10.1-7.717.816.627.725.77.015.02.63.1-19.18.0
         Nov. 36.6-1.538.118.735.431.312.48.314.60.0-20.43.7
         Dec. 26.7-7.133.9-26.8-39.1-38.5-20.90.1-17.9-0.517.1-4.7
2016 Jan. (p)60.35.255.024.034.131.421.06.44.62.16.9-17.0
Growth rates2013-0.7-6.32.2-2.3-2.3-2.4-2.9-0.1-12.310.9-5.11.9
20142.11.52.4-0.8-0.5-0.3-1.4-0.31.511.9-6.64.5
20157.9-1.812.30.80.70.40.01.9-2.6-4.21.90.6
2015 Q1 2.81.93.1-0.20.10.2-0.60.02.414.1-4.93.2
         Q2 5.11.66.70.20.60.3-0.21.2-1.017.8-5.23.0

         Q3 7.20.510.20.70.60.40.11.6-2.0-1.41.01.9

         Q4 7.9-1.812.30.80.70.40.01.9-2.6-4.21.90.6
2015 Aug. 6.31.08.81.01.00.70.21.40.512.4-0.33.2
         Sep. 7.20.510.20.70.60.40.11.6-2.0-1.41.01.9

         Oct. 6.90.29.90.90.90.70.31.8-1.52.00.02.5
         Nov. 7.8-0.711.71.11.20.90.71.9-0.1-1.4-0.73.4
         Dec. 7.9-1.812.30.80.70.40.01.9-2.6-4.21.90.6
2016 Jan. (p)8.6-2.413.70.90.80.60.41.9-2.5-9.52.3-0.4
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Adjusted for the derecognition of loans on the MFI balance sheet on account of their sale or securitisation.
3) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financial
corporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).
4) Including non-profit institutions serving households.S 215 Money and creditS 21ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics5.4 MFI loans to euro area non-financial corporations and households 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)
Outstanding amounts         Non-financial corporations 2)    Households 3)         TotalUp to 1 yearOver 1Over 5 years   Total
Loans forLoans forOther loans
and up toconsumptionhouse
Adjusted for5 yearsAdjusted forpurchaseloan salesloan salesand securi-and securi-tisation 4)tisation 4)1234567891
020134,353.64,407.71,065.7740.92,547.05,222.85,546.6573.63,853.7795.5
20144,271.74,329.71,080.7720.52,470.45,200.45,545.3563.43,861.0776.0
20154,273.44,333.71,038.2758.52,476.75,307.55,638.7595.63,948.3763.6
2015 Q1 4,301.54,357.41,089.2734.62,477.85,234.05,570.3567.83,890.9775.3
         Q2 4,291.34,347.61,080.8743.12,467.35,258.55,589.2578.73,908.9771.0

         Q3 4,274.94,333.81,058.3745.92,470.65,277.65,611.4582.43,926.5768.7

         Q4 4,273.44,333.71,038.2758.52,476.75,307.55,638.7595.63,948.3763.6
2015 Aug. 4,291.14,350.11,083.9743.02,464.25,268.85,605.3581.63,917.2770.0
         Sep. 4,274.94,333.81,058.3745.92,470.65,277.65,611.4582.43,926.5768.7

         Oct. 4,290.24,350.61,062.6755.62,472.15,301.95,630.1594.93,940.6766.5
         Nov. 4,307.54,365.81,076.6755.52,475.35,310.05,638.7596.83,944.8768.3
         Dec. 4,273.44,333.71,038.2758.52,476.75,307.55,638.7595.63,948.3763.6
2016 Jan. (p)4,289.14,352.31,048.5765.32,475.25,311.75,642.9596.33,952.0763.4
Transactions2013-132.9-145.1-44.3-44.6-44.0-4.0-15.0-18.227.4-13.2
2014-60.9-64.0-14.2
2.3-48.9-15.45.9-2.9-3.4-9.1
20150.66.3-45.832.314.198.077.121.680.1-3.6
2015 Q1 8.35.7-1.0
7.51.819.211.1
2.017.4-0.2
         Q2 -0.30.9-3.0
7.3-4.530.720.8
9.422.5-1.2
         Q3 -6.0-0.7-19.1
4.09.224.726.5
5.219.8-0.3
         Q4 -1.40.4-22.613.57.623.418.6
5.020.3-1.9
2015 Aug. -0.80.34.1-0.1-4.99.18.0
2.46.40.3
         Sep. -10.4-9.8-24.0
3.610.011.49.7
1.310.2-0.1
         Oct. 7.010.2-5.610.12.515.07.5
3.012.5-0.6
         Nov. 12.49.415.5-2.4-0.78.38.7
2.63.62.1
         Dec. -20.9-19.1-32.5
5.95.70.12.4-0.64.2-3.4
2016 Jan. (p)21.022.913.2
5.42.46.46.0
1.14.80.4
Growth rates2013-2.9-3.2-4.0-5.6-1.7-0.1-0.3-3.00.7-1.6
2014-1.4-1.4-1.3
0.3-1.9-0.30.1-0.5-0.1-1.1
20150.00.1-4.2
4.40.61.91.4
3.82.1-0.5
2015 Q1 -0.6-0.7-0.8
2.0-1.30.00.3-0.10.1-0.8
         Q2 -0.2-0.4-1.1
2.2-0.51.20.6
1.81.6-0.9
         Q3 0.10.1-2.7
3.60.21.61.1
2.61.8-0.5
         Q4 0.00.1-4.2
4.40.61.91.4
3.82.1-0.5
2015 Aug. 0.20.20.1
2.6-0.41.41.0
2.71.6-0.5
         Sep. 0.10.1-2.7
3.60.21.61.1
2.61.8-0.5
         Oct. 0.30.4-3.1
5.00.41.81.2
2.92.0-0.4
         Nov. 0.70.7-0.9
3.50.51.91.4
3.62.1-0.2
         Dec. 0.00.1-4.2
4.40.61.91.4
3.82.1-0.5
2016 Jan. (p)0.40.6-3.1
4.60.71.91.4
4.02.0-0.3
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financial
corporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).
3) Including non-profit institutions serving households.
4) Adjusted for the derecognition of loans on the MFI balance sheet on account of their sale or securitisation.S 225 Money and creditS 22ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics5.5 Counterparts to M3 other than credit to euro area residents 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)
Outstanding amounts         MFI liabilities   MFI assets      Central   Longer-term financial liabilities vis-à-vis other euro area residentsNet external
   Othergovernmentassets   holdings 2)TotalDepositsDepositsDebtCapital
   Totalwith anredeemablesecuritiesand reserves
agreedat noticewith a
ReposReverse
maturityof overmaturity
with centralrepos to
of over3 monthsof over
counter-central
2 years2 yearsparties 3)counter-parties 3)1234567891
02013261.77,311.02,371.291.52,507.22,341.11,146.5150.2183.8121.9
2014264.67,188.62,248.992.22,381.72,465.81,383.3226.5184.5139.7
2015278.37,069.62,184.279.82,254.12,551.51,331.3283.4205.9135.6
2015 Q1 283.27,320.92,258.590.62,395.72,576.11,505.6240.1236.3160.6
         Q2 265.27,169.42,223.186.72,330.62,529.01,459.0242.1224.6147.1
         Q3 287.67,101.62,223.883.72,264.42,529.71,361.8255.2213.6140.0
         Q4 278.37,069.62,184.279.82,254.12,551.51,331.3283.4205.9135.6
2015 Aug. 274.57,127.12,225.084.32,289.82,528.01,355.3244.1207.0128.4

         Sep. 287.67,101.62,223.883.72,264.42,529.71,361.8255.2213.6140.0

         Oct. 347.87,107.32,207.482.22,257.12,560.51,396.2305.3196.4144.9
         Nov. 296.07,123.82,189.480.32,284.32,569.91,385.8271.5217.7146.0

         Dec. 278.37,069.62,184.279.82,254.12,551.51,331.3283.4205.9135.6
2016 Jan. (p)306.07,054.72,174.578.62,224.52,577.11,309.8308.8213.8141.7
Transactions2013-44.9-89.7-19.0-14.3-137.380.9362.0-62.532.243.7
2014-5.7-162.5-122.32.0-151.4109.1238.4-0.20.717.8
20157.5-219.2-104.0-13.5-203.8102.0-97.4-10.221.4-4.0
2015 Q1 15.5-36.8-27.8-2.6-52.345.93.433.351.721.0
         Q2 -18.0-87.4-34.7-3.9-50.51.8-0.3-55.3-11.8-13.6
         Q3 22.0-37.66.1-3.1-58.517.9-64.10.9-11.0-7.1
         Q4 -11.9-57.4-47.5-3.9-42.436.4-36.510.8-7.7-4.3
2015 Aug. 20.8-14.4-2.7-1.4-13.33.0-19.5-17.0-0.3-13.9
         Sep. 12.8-19.9-1.1-0.6-25.16.97.46.96.611.6
         Oct. 58.0-33.9-23.4-1.5-17.58.610.554.3-17.25.0
         Nov. -51.8-11.2-21.1-1.9-6.218.0-15.3-40.321.31.1
         Dec. -18.1-12.3-3.0-0.5-18.69.8-31.7-3.2-11.7-10.4
2016 Jan. (p)27.7-31.3-9.1-1.2-24.63.5-28.215.47.96.9
Growth rates2013-14.7-1.2-0.8-13.5-5.13.4
- - 10.323.3
2014-2.2-2.2-5.22.2-6.04.6
- - 0.414.6
20153.1-3.0-4.6-14.4-8.44.1
- - 11.6-2.9
2015 Q1 5.5-2.7-5.9-0.1-6.84.6
- - 33.437.6
         Q2 -6.0-3.0-5.3-3.4-8.14.3
- - 31.023.5
         Q3 11.8-3.4-3.7-9.1-9.33.0
- - 30.515.0
         Q4 3.1-3.0-4.6-14.4-8.44.1
- - 11.6-2.9
2015 Aug. -1.4-3.2-4.3-7.9-8.73.6
- - 20.39.8
         Sep. 11.8-3.4-3.7-9.1-9.33.0
- - 30.515.0
         Oct. 29.6-3.5-4.2-10.1-9.03.0
- - 7.219.6
         Nov. 10.3-3.4-4.9-11.4-8.83.6
- - 18.011.7
         Dec. 3.1-3.0-4.6-14.4-8.44.1
- - 11.6-2.9
2016 Jan. (p)3.4-3.3-4.4-15.4-8.93.5
- - 5.17.0
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Comprises central government holdings of deposits with the MFI sector and of securities issued by the MFI sector.
3) Not adjusted for seasonal effects.S 236 Fiscal developmentsS 23ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics6.1 Deficit/surplus(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)   Deficit (-)/surplus (+)Memo item:PrimaryTotalCentralStateLocalSocualdeficit (-)/governmentgovernmentgovernment
securitysurplus (+)funds123456
2011-4.2-3.3-0.7-0.20.0-1.22012-3.7-3.4-0.30.00.0-0.62013-3.0-2.6-0.20.0-0.1-0.22014-2.6-2.2-0.20.0-0.10.12014 Q4 -2.6. . . . 0.1
2015 Q1 -2.5. . . . 0.1
         Q2 -2.4. . . . 0.1
         Q3 -2.1. . . . 0.3
Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.6.2 Revenue and expenditure(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)         Revenue   Expenditure      Total   Current revenueCapitalTotal
   Current expenditureCapitalrevenueexpenditureDirectIndirectNet social
Compen-IntermediateInterestSocial
taxestaxescontributions
sation ofconsumption
benefitsemployees1234
56789
1011
1213201144.944.511.612.615.10.449.144.810.4
5.33.022.2
4.3201246.145.612.212.915.30.449.745.210.4
5.43.022.6
4.5201346.646.112.512.915.50.549.645.510.4
5.42.823.0
4.1201446.846.312.513.115.50.549.445.410.3
5.32.723.1
3.92014 Q4 46.846.312.513.115.50.549.445.410.3
5.32.723.1
3.92015 Q1 46.746.212.513.115.50.549.245.310.3
5.32.623.1
3.9         Q2 46.646.212.613.115.50.549.045.210.3
5.32.523.1
3.8         Q3 46.646.112.613.115.40.548.745.010.2
5.32.523.1
3.7Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.6.3 Government debt-to-GDP ratio(as a percentage of GDP; outstanding amounts at end of period)               Total   Financial instrument
   Holder   Original maturity   Residual maturity
   CurrencyCurrencyLoansDebt   Resident creditorsNon-residentUp toOverUp toOver 1OverEuro orOther
andsecurities
creditors1 year1 year1 yearand up to5 yearsparticipatingcurren-
depositsMFIs5 yearscurrenciescies
123456
789101112
1314
201186.02.915.567.542.924.443.112.273.820.430.035.684.21.8
201289.33.017.468.945.526.243.811.478.019.731.737.987.22.2

201391.12.717.271.246.026.245.110.480.719.432.239.489.12.0

201492.12.717.072.445.326.046.810.182.019.032.141.090.12.0
2014 Q4 92.12.717.072.4. . . . . . . . . . 
2015 Q1 92.92.716.873.4. . . . . . . . . . 
         Q2 92.32.816.273.3. . . . . . . . . . 
         Q3 91.62.716.172.8. . . . . . . . . . 
Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.S 246 Fiscal developmentsS 24ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics6.4 Annual change in the government debt-to-GDP ratio and underlying factors 1)(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)Change inPrimary
   Deficit-debt adjustmentInterest-Memo item:
debt-to-deficit (+)/
   growthBorrowing
GDP ratio 2)surplus (-)Total   Transactions in main financial assetsRevaluationOtherdifferentialrequirement
effectsTotalCurrencyLoansDebtEquity andand other
andsecuritiesinvestmentchanges in
depositsfund sharesvolume
123456
78910
111220112.11.20.2-0.40.2-0.2-0.2-0.10.40.2
0.83.920123.40.60.01.00.30.3-0.10.5-1.30.3
2.75.020131.70.2-0.3-0.6-0.5-0.4-0.10.3-0.10.4
1.92.720141.0-0.10.0-0.10.3-0.2-0.30.00.00.1
1.12.62014 Q4 1.0-0.10.0-0.10.3-0.1-0.30.1-0.10.2
1.12.72015 Q1 0.8-0.10.00.00.3-0.1-0.20.0-0.10.1
0.92.6         Q2 -0.6-0.1-0.9-0.9-0.3-0.3-0.2-0.20.00.0
0.51.5         Q3 -0.6-0.3-0.5-0.30.2-0.3-0.2-0.10.0-0.1
0.11.7Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.1) Intergovernmental lending in the context of the financial crisis is consolidated except in quarterly data on the deficit-debt adjustment.

2) Calculated as the difference between the government debt-to-GDP ratios at the end of the reference period and a year earlier.
6.5 Government debt securities 1)(debt service as a percentage of GDP; flows during debt service period; average nominal yields in percentages per annum)   Debt service due within 1 year 2) Average   Average nominal yields 4)      residual      Total   Principal
   Interestmaturity   Outstanding amounts   Transactionsin years 3)MaturitiesMaturitiesTotalFloatingZero   Fixed rateIssuanceRedemption
of up to 3of up to 3ratecoupon
monthsmonthsMaturitiesof up to 1year12
34
5678910111213
201316.514.45.02.10.5
6.33.51.71.33.72.81.21.8
201415.913.95.12.00.5
6.43.11.50.53.52.70.81.6
201515.313.34.42.00.5
6.62.91.20.13.33.00.41.2
2014 Q4 15.913.95.12.00.5
6.43.11.50.53.52.70.81.6
2015 Q1 15.513.44.62.00.5
6.53.11.30.33.52.90.61.7
         Q2 15.413.44.92.00.5
6.63.01.30.23.42.90.51.5
         Q3 15.513.54.42.00.5
6.62.91.20.13.33.00.41.4
2015 Aug. 15.313.44.42.00.5
6.62.91.20.13.42.90.41.5
         Sep. 15.513.54.42.00.5
6.62.91.20.13.33.00.41.4
         Oct. 15.913.94.32.00.5
6.62.91.20.13.33.00.41.4
         Nov. 16.014.04.72.00.5
6.52.91.20.13.33.00.41.4
         Dec. 15.313.34.42.00.5
6.62.91.20.13.33.00.41.2
2016 Jan. 15.413.45.42.00.5
6.62.81.20.13.33.00.41.2
Source: ECB.
1) At face value and not consolidated within the general government sector.
2) Excludes future payments on debt securities not yet outstanding and early redemptions.
3) Residual maturity at the end of the period.
4) Outstanding amounts at the end of the period; transactions as 12-month average.S 256 Fiscal developmentsS 25ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016 - Statistics6.6 Fiscal developments in euro area countries(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period and outstanding amounts at end of period)Government deficit (-)/surplus (+)BelgiumGermanyEstoniaIrelandGreeceSpainFrance
ItalyCyprus
123456789
2011-4.1-1.01.2-12.5-10.2
-9.5-5.1-3.5-5.7
2012-4.1-0.1-0.3-8.0-8.8-10.4
-4.8-3.0-5.8
2013-2.9-0.1-0.1-5.7-12.4
-6.9-4.1-2.9-4.9
2014-3.10.30.7-3.9-3.6-5.9-3.9-3.0-8.9
2014 Q4 -3.10.30.7-3.9-3.6-5.9-3.9-3.0-8.9
2015 Q1 -3.30.40.5-3.6-4.7-5.9-3.9-3.0-0.2
         Q2 -3.10.40.6-3.0-5.3-5.5-3.9-2.9-0.4
         Q3 -3.00.80.7-2.5-5.4-5.3-3.7-2.8-0.9
Government debt2011102.278.45.9109.3172.0
69.585.2116.465.8
2012104.179.79.5120.2159.4
85.489.6123.279.3
2013105.177.49.9120.0177.0
93.792.3128.8102.5
2014106.774.910.4107.5178.6
99.395.6132.3108.2
2014 Q4 106.774.910.4107.5178.6
99.395.6132.3108.2
2015 Q1 110.974.310.0104.7169.9
99.797.5135.3107.5
         Q2 109.372.59.9102.1168.9
99.397.7136.0110.4
         Q3 108.771.99.899.4171.0
99.397.0134.6109.6
Government deficit (-)/surplus (+)LatviaLithuaniaLuxembourgMaltaNetherlandsAustriaPortugalSloveniaSlovakiaFinland
10111213141516171819
2011-3.4-8.9
0.5-2.6-4.3-2.6-7.4-6.6-4.1-1.0
2012-0.8-3.1
0.2-3.6-3.9-2.2-5.7-4.1-4.2-2.1
2013-0.9-2.6
0.7-2.6-2.4-1.3-4.8-15.0-2.6-2.5
2014-1.5-0.7
1.4-2.1-2.4-2.7-7.2-5.0-2.8-3.3
2014 Q4 -1.6-0.7
1.4-2.1-2.4-2.7-7.2-5.0-2.8-3.3
2015 Q1 -1.9-0.8
0.7-2.5-2.0-2.2-7.2-4.7-2.8-3.3
         Q2 -2.00.30.5-2.2-1.9-2.2-6.4-4.6-2.8-2.8
         Q3 -2.00.00.2-1.7-1.7-2.4-3.2-4.1-2.6-2.9
Government debt201142.837.219.269.861.782.2111.446.443.348.5
201241.439.822.167.666.481.6126.253.751.952.9
201339.138.823.469.667.980.8129.070.854.655.6
201440.640.723.068.368.284.2130.280.853.559.3
2014 Q4 40.840.722.966.968.284.2130.280.853.559.3
2015 Q1 35.638.022.268.569.284.9130.381.853.960.6
         Q2 35.337.621.667.467.186.3128.680.854.362.4
         Q3 36.438.121.366.366.385.3130.584.153.561.2
Source: Eurostat.© European Central Bank, 2016Postal address 60640 Frankfurt am Main, GermanyTelephone
 +49 69 1344 0Website
 www.ecb.europa.euThis Bulletin was produced under the responsibility of the Executive Board of the ECB. Translations are prepared and published by 
the national central banks.All rights reserved. Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. The cut-off date for the statistics included in this issue was 9 March 2016.

ISSN 2363-3417 (html)ISSN 2363-3417 (epub)ISSN 2363-3417 (online)EU catalogue No QB-BP-16-002-EN-Q (html)EU catalogue No QB-BP-16-002-EN-E (epub)EU catalogue No QB-BP-16-002-EN-N (online)