Economic Bulletin Issue 1 / 2016
2Contents  
Update on economic and monetary developmentsSummary 31 External environment 52 Financial developments 73 Economic activity 94 Prices and costs 115 Money and credit 13  Boxes1  
What is driving Brazil™s economic downturn?
 162  A closer look at differences between industrial gross value 
 added and industrial production 193 Eurosystem publishes more detailed criteria for accepting rating agencies
 23  A
rticle1  
Recent developments in the composition and cost  of bank funding in the euro area 26  Statistics S13Update on economic and monetary  developments SummaryGlobal growth remains modest and uneven. While activity continues to expand at a solid pace in advanced economies, developments in emerging market economies remain weak overall and more diverse. After a very weak first half of the year in 
2015, global trade is recovering, albeit at a slow pace. Global headline inflation has remained low and recent additional declines in oil and other commodity prices will further dampen inflationary pressures.Increased uncertainty related to developments in China and renewed oil price declines have led to a sharp correction in global equity markets and renewed downward pressures on euro area sovereign bond yields. Corporate and sovereign bond yield spreads have widened slightly. The increase in global uncertainty has 

been accompanied by an appreciation of the effective exchange rate of the euro.
The economic recovery in the euro area is continuing, largely on the back of dynamic private consumption. More recently, however, the recovery has been partly held 
back by a slowdown in export growth. The latest indicators are consistent with a 
broadly unchanged pace of economic growth in the fourth quarter of 2015. Looking ahead, domestic demand should be further supported by the ECB™s monetary policy 
measures and their favourable impact on financial conditions, as well as by the 
earlier progress made with fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. Moreover, the 
renewed fall in the price of oil should provide additional support for households™ real 
disposable income and corporate profitability and, therefore, private consumption and investment. In addition, the fiscal stance in the euro area is becoming slightly expansionary, reflecting inter alia measures in support of refugees. However, the 
recovery in the euro area is dampened by subdued growth prospects in emerging markets, volatile financial markets, the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a 
number of sectors and the sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms. The 
risks to the euro area growth outlook remain on the downside and relate in particular to the heightened uncertainties regarding developments in the global economy as well as to broader geopolitical risks.Euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.2% in December 2015, compared with 0.1% 
in November. The December outcome was lower than expected, mainly reflecting the 
renewed sharp decline in oil prices, as well as lower food and services price inflation. Most measures of underlying inflation continued to be broadly stable, following a pick-up in the first half of 2015. Non-energy import prices were still the main source 
of upward price momentum as domestic price pressures remained moderate. On the basis of current oil futures prices, which are well below the level observed a few weeks ago, the expected path of annual HICP inflation in 2016 is now significantly 
lower compared with the outlook in early December 2015. Inflation rates are currently 
expected to remain very low or to turn negative in the coming months and to pick up 4only later in 2016. Thereafter, supported by the ECB™s monetary policy measures 
and the economic recovery, inflation rates should continue to recover, although 
risks of second-round effects from the renewed fall in energy price inflation will be 
monitored closely. 
Broad money growth remained robust in November, driven mainly by the low 
opportunity cost of holding the most liquid monetary assets and the impact of the ECB™s expanded asset purchase programme. In addition, lending to the euro area 
private sector continued on a path of gradual recovery, supported by easing credit 
standards and increasing loan demand. Nevertheless, the annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations remains low, as developments in loans to 

enterprises continue to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets.At its meeting on 21 January 2016, based on its regular economic and monetary analyses, and after the recalibration of the ECB™s monetary policy measures in 
December 2015, the Governing Council decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. These rates are expected to remain at present or lower levels for an 
extended period of time. With regard to non-standard monetary policy measures, 
the asset purchases are proceeding smoothly and continue to have a favourable impact on the cost and availability of credit for firms and households. More generally, 
and taking stock of the evidence available at the beginning of 2016, it is clear that the monetary policy measures adopted by the Governing Council since mid-2014 are working. As a result, developments in the real economy, credit provision and 
financing conditions have improved and have strengthened the euro area™s resilience 
to recent global economic shocks. The decisions taken in early December to 

extend the monthly net asset purchases of •60 billion to at least the end of March 2017, and to reinvest the principal payments on maturing securities for as long as necessary, will result in a significant addition of liquidity to the banking system and 
will strengthen the forward guidance on interest rates.However, at the start of the new year, the Governing Council assessed that downside 
risks have increased again amid heightened uncertainty about emerging market economies™ growth prospects, volatility in financial and commodity markets, and 
geopolitical risks. In this environment, euro area inflation dynamics also continue to be weaker than expected. Therefore, it will be necessary for the Governing Council 

to review and possibly reconsider the ECB™s monetary policy stance in early March, 
when the new staff macroeconomic projections Œ also covering the year 2018 Œ will 
become available. In the meantime, work will be carried out to ensure that all the technical conditions are in place to make the full range of policy options available for implementation, if needed.51 External environmentSurvey indicators suggest that global growth remained modest and uneven at the turn of the year.
 The global composite output Purchasing Managers™ 

Index (PMI) decreased from 53.6 to 52.9 in December 2015 against the backdrop 
of a slowdown in both the services and manufacturing sectors (see Chart 1). In 
quarterly terms the global output PMI declined slightly in the fourth quarter relative 
to the previous quarter. Data point to a sustained growth momentum in advanced 

economies, with PMIs increasing in the United Kingdom and Japan, although 
momentum slowed somewhat in the United States. Developments across emerging 
market economies (EMEs) remain weak overall and more diverse, with the latest 
PMI data suggesting some strengthening in China, a deceleration in growth in India 
and Russia, and continued weakness in Brazil in the fourth quarter.
Global trade has continued to recover, albeit at a 

slow pace. Although global trade in the first half of 2015 was very weak, it has since improved. The growth 

in the volume of global goods imports weakened slightly 
in October to 1.8% (three-month on three-month), down 
from 2.3% in September. Import growth momentum 

strengthened in advanced economies, but the 
contribution from EMEs decreased, driven principally 
by lower trade in Latin America. However, early monthly 

data at the country level confirm that global import 
growth may have moderated again towards the end of 
last year. The global PMI for new export orders dipped 

slightly in December (to 50.6), but remained in positive 
territory, suggesting continued modest trade growth 

around the turn of the year. 
Global headline inflation has remained low.
 A less 
negative contribution from energy prices pushed up 
slightly annual consumer price inflation in the OECD 
area to 0.7% in November from 0.6% in the previous month. Inflation excluding food and energy remained unchanged at 1.8%. However, 

the overall low global CPI inflation masks considerable differences across countries. 

While headline inflation is low in most advanced economies and also in China, it is 
considerably higher in some large economies, including Russia, Brazil and Turkey. 
Recent additional declines in oil and other commodity prices will further dampen inflationary pressures. Against the background of an oversupplied oil 

market and weakening oil demand, Brent crude oil prices have undergone a renewed 

downturn since mid-October 2015, falling to USD 29 per barrel on 20 January 2016. On the supply side, OPEC™s December decision to maintain current production levels 

at record rates has fuelled the downward dynamics, while non-OPEC output has 
been more resilient than previously expected, with declining US shale production 
compensated for by oil supply from Canada, Norway and Russia. Looking ahead 
uncertainty remains about the impact of the lifting of sanctions against Iran on Chart 1Global PMI(diffusion index, 50 = no change)
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
20082009201020112012201320142015
composite output
manufacturing output
composite average 1999-present
manufacturing average 1999-present
Sources: Markit and ECB staff calculations.
Note: The latest observation refers to December 2015.
6global oil supply. On the demand side, preliminary estimates showed a steeper than 
previously expected decline in global oil demand growth in the fourth quarter of 2015 
owing to the exceptionally mild winter (in Europe, the United States and Japan) and 
weaker economic sentiment in emerging markets (China, Brazil and Russia). Oil 
market participants continue to expect only a very gradual increase in oil prices in 
the coming years. Non-oil commodity prices have also fallen slightly by 3% since the 
end of November, driven mostly by decreasing food prices (down by 4%).
US activity growth appears to have softened in the fourth quarter, although 
underlying fundamentals remain solid. Following a solid expansion of real GDP 
by an annualised rate of 2.0% in the third quarter of 2015, economic activity showed 
signs of deceleration in the fourth quarter. Retail sales and vehicle purchases have 

slowed, and indicators also suggest some weakness in the industrial sectors, with 
a decline in the Institute of Supply Management manufacturing index. In addition, 
external headwinds, namely modest global growth and the stronger US dollar, 

continue to weigh on exports. However, continued strong improvements in the 

labour market suggest that the underlying strength of the economy persists and that 
weakness in domestic demand should prove largely temporary. Non-farm payrolls 

rose sharply in December 2015, with the unemployment rate at 5.0%. Headline 
inflation remains low. Annual headline CPI inflation rose to 0.5% in November from 

0.2% in October on account of a smaller negative contribution from energy prices. 
Excluding food and energy, inflation edged up slightly to 2.0%, supported by rising 

services prices.In Japan, momentum in the economy has been relatively subdued. The second preliminary release revised real GDP in the third quarter of 2015 higher by 
0.5 percentage point to 0.3% quarter on quarter. However, short-term indicators 
point to relatively modest growth in the final quarter of 2015. Although real exports 

of goods continued to recover in November, declines in retail sales and industrial 

production in November point to weaker domestic momentum. Annual CPI inflation 

remained unchanged at 0.3% in November, but annual CPI inflation excluding food 

and energy rose to 0.9%.In the United Kingdom, GDP continued to grow at a moderate pace. 
In the third quarter of 2015 real GDP increased by 0.4% quarter on quarter, less than previously 
estimated. Economic growth was driven by robust household consumption, in turn 
supported by the increase in real disposable income, which was driven by low 
energy prices. Investment growth remained positive, albeit decelerating compared 
with the previous quarter, while net exports exerted a drag on growth. Short-term 

indicators, in particular industrial production data and PMI surveys, point towards 
a steady pace of GDP growth in the last quarter of 2015. The unemployment rate 

trended downwards, declining to 5.1% in the three months to November 2015, while 
earnings growth fell to 2.0%, compared with 3.0% in the third quarter of the year. In 

December 2015 annual headline CPI inflation was close to zero (0.2%) on the back 
of low energy and food prices, while inflation excluding food and energy edged up 
to 1.4%.In China, financial market volatility has led to renewed uncertainty about the 

outlook, although macroeconomic data remain consistent with a gradual 
7slowdown in activity growth. The Chinese stock market dropped sharply in the first 
weeks of January, ahead of the expected expiry of a six-month ban on share sales by 

large shareholders. However, macroeconomic data have been more resilient. China 

reported quarter-on-quarter growth of 1.6% in the fourth quarter of 2015. Annual real 

GDP growth in 2015 was 6.9%, close to the government target. Short-term indicators 
remain consistent with a gradual slowdown in the 

economy amidst some rebalancing towards services and 

consumption in the face of subdued industrial output. 
Growth momentum remains weak and heterogeneous across other EMEs. While activity 
has remained more resilient in commodity-importing 
countries (including India, Turkey and non-euro area 

central and eastern European countries), growth 
remains very weak in commodity-exporting countries. In 
particular, latest short-term indicators suggest that the 

downturn in Brazil has intensified. As Box 1 discusses, 

weak domestic fundamentals and limited support 
from external factors imply that Brazil will remain in 
recession this year. The Russian economy showed 

tentative signs of improvement in the third quarter of 
2015 (see Chart 2) but, given the strong dependence on oil, the renewed oil price decline is likely to weigh on 
the short-term outlook.2 Financial developmentsGlobal equity prices declined significantly amid 

increasing uncertainty related to developments 

in China and a sharp reduction in the oil price. The broad EURO STOXX equity price index 

declined by around 16% over the review period from 

2 December 2015 to 20 January 2016 (see Chart 3). 
Somewhat smaller declines were observed in the 

United States, where equity prices, as measured by 

the S&P 500 index, declined by around 12%. Financial 

sector equities in the euro area and the United States 

declined by 18% and 13% respectively, thereby slightly 

underperforming non-financial sector equities.  Measures 

of equity market volatility Œ an indicator of financial 

market uncertainty Œ increased significantly.
The developments in oil and global equity markets led to renewed downward pressure on euro area 
sovereign bond yields following the increase at the Chart 2Global industrial production growth(year-on-year percentage changes)-20
-15
-10
-5
0510
15
20
20082009201020112012201320142015
China
Brazil
Russia
OECD countries
Sources: OECD and national sources.Note: The latest observation refers to December 2015 for China, to November 2015 for 

Brazil and Russia, and to October 2015 for OECD countries.Chart 3Euro area and US equity price indices(1 January 2014 = 100)90
95
100
105
110

115
120
125
130
Jan 14May 14Sep 14Jan 15May 15Sep 15Jan 16
EURO STOXX
S&P 500
Sources: Thomson Reuters and ECB calculations.
Note: The latest observation is for 20 January 2016.
8beginning of the review period. Sovereign yields increased after the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB in December 2015 and fell back somewhat again as global uncertainty increased. Over the review period the GDP-weighted  

ten-year euro area sovereign bond yield increased by around 15 basis points, to 
stand at 1.16% on 20 January. The lower-rated countries recorded the strongest 

increases in general, resulting in a widening of their sovereign yield spread against 
Germany, which was partly related to financial and political developments.
The increase in global uncertainty led to an 
appreciation of the effective exchange rate of the 
euro. The euro appreciated markedly in effective terms 

in the first half of December 2015 as a result of the 
increase in yields following the December Governing 
Council meeting. The effective exchange rate of the 

euro was broadly stable in the period up to  

mid-January, but started to appreciate again thereafter 

amid the increase in global uncertainty. Overall, the 

euro strengthened by 5.3% in trade-weighted terms 
over the review period (see Chart 4). In bilateral terms, 
the euro appreciated against the US dollar, the pound 

sterling, the Chinese renminbi, the Russian rouble 
and the currencies of emerging market economies Œ 
particularly the Argentine peso following the decision by 

the new Argentine government to lift currency controls. 

The euro also appreciated against the currencies of 
commodity-exporting countries and the currencies of 
central and eastern European countries. By contrast, 
it depreciated against the Japanese yen, which was 
supported by the decline in risk appetite.The increase in global uncertainty also led to higher corporate bond spreads. Spreads increased the most on lower-rated high-yield bonds. However, spreads for 

both investment-grade and high-yield bonds are significantly lower in the euro area 
than in the United States. This can mostly be explained by the very high spread 

levels observed in the energy sector in the United States owing to the low oil prices. The EONIA declined over the review period following the Governing Council™s 
decision to cut the deposit facility rate by 0.10% to -0.30% and the continued 
increase in excess liquidity.
 The EONIA has remained in a range between 

-22 and -25 basis points through most of the review period. At the end of the year it 
temporarily rose to about -13 basis points owing to increased demand for liquidity. 

During the review period, excess liquidity rose by •62.5 billion to •639.9 billion, 
supported by ongoing Eurosystem purchases within the expanded asset purchase 
programme, as well as an allotment of •18.3 billion in the sixth targeted longer-term 
refinancing operation on 11 December 2015.
Chart 4Changes in the exchange rate of the euro(indicated currency per euro; percentage changes)-15-10-5051015202530354045
Croatian kuna
Argentine peso
Indian rupee
Brazilian real
Taiwan dollar
Romanian leu
Danish krone
Hungarian forint
Indonesian rupiah
South Korean won
Turkish lira
Russian rouble
Swedish krona
Czech koruna
Polish zloty
Japanese yen
Swiss franc
Pound sterling
US dollar
Chinese renminbi
EER-38
since 2 December 2015
since 2 December 2014
Source: ECB.Notes:  Percentage changes relative to 20 January 2016. EER-38 is the nominal 
effective exchange rate of the euro against the currencies of 38 of the euro area™s most 

important trading partners.93 Economic activityThe economic recovery in the euro area is continuing, largely on the back of developments in private consumption. Real GDP rose by 0.3%, quarter on 
quarter, in the third quarter of 2015, following a rise of 0.4% in the previous quarter 

(see Chart 5).1 The most recent economic indicators point to a continuation of this 
growth trend in the fourth quarter of 2015. Although output has now been rising for 

two and a half years, euro area real GDP still remains slightly below the  

pre-crisis peak recorded in the first quarter of 2008. Private consumption continues to be the main 
driver of the ongoing recovery. Consumer spending has benefited from rising real disposable income among 

households, which in turn primarily reflects lower oil 
prices and rising employment. In 2015, oil prices fell 
by slightly more than 35% in euro terms compared 
with the previous year, while euro area employment 

rose by 1% (based on data up to the third quarter). In 
addition to lower oil prices, a broad range of factors, 
indicative of a strengthened domestic economy, are 

supporting private consumption. Households™ balance 

sheets have gradually become less constrained and 
consumer confidence has remained strong. As for the 

near-term outlook, recent data on retail trade and new 
passenger car registrations signal some weakening in 
consumer spending. This slowdown is assessed to be 

temporary, however, as it may reflect the dampening 

impact on retail trade from the mild weather conditions, 
as well as a negative contribution from French retail 
sales following the terrorist attacks of November 2015 in Paris. Indeed, survey data on consumer confidence and households™ financial 

situations suggest continued positive developments in private consumption.By contrast, investment growth has been weak in 2015, although there are signs 
of improving conditions for non-construction investment. Investment conditions 

improved in the last quarter of 2015. According to the European Commission, 

confidence rose in the capital goods sector and low demand became less of a 

constraining factor for production. Furthermore, available country data and data on 

capital goods and construction production point to modest growth during the final 

quarter of 2015. Looking further ahead, a cyclical recovery in investment is expected, 

supported by strengthening demand, improving profit margins and diminishing spare 

capacity. Financing conditions are also improving. Firms™ recourse to external financing 

has picked up and the most recent survey on the access to finance of enterprises 

(SAFE) and euro area bank lending survey (BLS) show that financial conditions should 

act as less of a drag on investment. Nevertheless, the need for further corporate 
1 In Eurostat™s second release of the euro area national accounts, growth was revised upwards by  
0.1 percentage point for both the first and second quarters of 2015.Chart 5Euro area real GDP, the ESI and the composite PMI
(quarter-on-quarter percentage growth; index; diffusion index)
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5

0.0

0.5
1.0
1.5
20
25
30
35
40
45

50

55
60
65
20082009201020112012201320142015
real GDP (right-hand scale)
ESI (left-hand scale)
composite PMI (left-hand scale)
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, Markit and ECB.Notes: The Economic Sentiment Indicator (ESI) is normalised with the mean and 

standard deviation of the Purchasing Managers™ Index (PMI). The latest observations 

are for the third quarter of 2015 for real GDP and for December 2015 for the ESI and 

the PMI.10deleveraging in some countries and investors™ reduced long-term growth expectations 
could serve to moderate the recovery in investment.Growth in euro area exports continues to remain subdued overall. According to 
monthly trade data for October and November, exports started to recover towards 
the end of 2015, standing in these two months 0.4% above the average level in the 
third quarter. Export growth was likely driven by strengthened growth momentum in 

advanced economies, with still negative contributions from some emerging market 
economies. More timely indicators, such as surveys, signal slight improvements in 
foreign demand and increases in export orders outside the euro area in the near 
term. Moreover, the depreciation in the euro effective exchange rate in the first half 

of 2015 continues to support exports.Overall, the latest indicators are consistent with economic growth in the final 
quarter of 2015, at around the same rate as in the third quarter. While declining by 

0.7%, month on month, in November (following a rise of 0.8% in October), industrial 

production (excluding construction) still stood 0.1% above its average level in the 

third quarter of 2015, when it rose by 0.2%, quarter on quarter (Box 2 takes a closer 

look at differences between industrial production and value added in industry). In 

addition, both the European Commission™s Economic Sentiment Indicator (ESI) and 

the composite output Purchasing Managers™ Index (PMI) improved between the third 

and fourth quarter of last year (see Chart 5). Both indicators rose in December, thus 

remaining at levels above their respective long-term averages.The labour market situation is continuing to 
improve gradually. Employment increased further 
by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of 

2015, having now risen for nine consecutive quarters 
(see Chart 6). As a result, employment stood 1.1% 
above the level recorded one year earlier, the highest 

annual rise observed since the second quarter of 
2008. The unemployment rate for the euro area, which 

started to decline in mid-2013, fell further in November 
to stand at 10.5%. More timely information gained from 
survey results points to further gradual labour market 
improvements in the period ahead.Looking ahead, the economic recovery is expected 
to continue. Domestic demand should be further 

supported by the monetary policy measures and their 

favourable impact on financial conditions, as well as 

by previous progress made with fiscal consolidation 

and structural reforms. Moreover, the renewed fall in oil 

prices should provide additional support for households™ 

real disposable income and corporate profitability, and 
thus for private consumption and investment. In addition, the fiscal stance in the euro 

area is becoming slightly expansionary, reflecting, inter alia, measures in support of 

refugees. However, the economic recovery in the euro area continues to be hampered 

by subdued growth prospects in emerging markets, volatile financial markets, the 
Chart 6Euro area employment, PMI employment expectations and unemployment(quarter-on-quarter percentage growth; diffusion index; percentage of the labour force)
56
7
8910
11
12
13
-1.0

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4
-0.2
0.0

0.2
0.4
0.6
20082009201020112012201320142015
employment (left-hand scale)
PMI employment expectations (left-hand scale)
unemployment rate (right-hand scale)
Sources: Eurostat, Markit and ECB. Notes: The Purchasing Managers™ Index (PMI) is expressed as a deviation from 50 

divided by 10. The latest observations are for the third quarter of 2015 for employment, 

December 2015 for the PMI and November 2015 for unemployment.11necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and the sluggish pace of 
implementation of structural reforms. The risks to the euro area growth outlook remain 

on the downside and relate, in particular, to the heightened uncertainties regarding 

developments in the global economy, as well as to broader geopolitical risks. The 

results of the latest round of the ECB™s Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted 

in early January, show that private sector GDP growth forecasts remain broadly 

unchanged compared with the previous round conducted in early October 
 (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/prices/indic/forecast/html/index.en.html
).4 Prices and costsHeadline inflation came under renewed downward pressure due to further oil 

price declines. Positive base effects, due to falling energy prices at the end of 2014, 

were anticipated to have a strong impact on headline inflation.2 These were almost offset 
by the effect of further recent declines in the oil price and by lower food price inflation, 

with the mild weather contributing to weaker prices for unprocessed food. As a result, 

headline inflation increased only slightly from 0.1% in November to 0.2% in December.
Most measures of underlying inflation are 
perceptibly higher than at the turn of 2014/15, but 
have not picked up further since the summer of 
2015. For example, HICP inflation excluding food and 

energy was unchanged at 0.9% in December, after 

continuing to move within the range of 0.9% and 1.1% 
since August. The profiles of most other measures of 

underlying inflation have been broadly similar. Services 

inflation decreased in December for the second 
consecutive month, partly due to the indirect effects 

of oil price declines on prices for transport-related 
services. Non-energy industrial goods inflation was 
unchanged at 0.5%, after recording a broad-based 
increase in November to its highest level since  

mid-2013. This stability masked the continued increase 

in durable goods inflation to 0.9% in December, 

consistent with the impact of the weaker euro exchange 
rate and the rise in consumption of durable goods. 
This increase was offset by a decline in the annual 

rate of change in prices for semi-durables, in particular 
clothing, possibly due to the mild weather. 
Import prices remain the main source of upward pipeline pressure. The annual 

rate of growth in import prices for non-food consumer goods rebounded to 3.9% in 

November, from 3.1% in October. However, domestic price pressures remained weak, 

reflecting declining commodity input costs and continued moderate wage increases. The 

annual rate of change in producer prices for domestic sales of non-food consumer goods 
2 See the box entitled ﬁThe role of base effects in the projected path of HICP inflationﬂ, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8, ECB, 2015.Chart 7Contribution of components to euro area headline HICP inflation
(annual percentage changes; percentage point contributions)-2.0
-1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
20082009201020112012201320142015
HICP
food
energy
non-energy industrial goods
services
Sources: Eurostat and ECB staff calculations.
Note: The latest observation is for December 2015.
12was unchanged at 0.2% in November, and has remained within the range of 0.0% and 
0.2% since April. Earlier in the pricing chain, the annual rate of change in producer prices 

for intermediate goods continued its decline to -2.0% in November, which was the lowest 

seen since December 2009. Survey data on input and output prices up to December 

also point to continued weak domestic pipeline pressures. 
Wage growth has remained moderate, while profit margin growth has 
strengthened. The annual growth in compensation per employee declined to 1.1% 

in the third quarter of 2015, from 1.3% in the second quarter. Given that the decline 

in productivity was more modest, the result was a slight decrease in the growth rate 

of unit labour costs. Wage growth is likely being held back by a range of factors, 

including continued elevated levels of slack in the labour market, relatively weak 

productivity growth, and ongoing effects from labour market reforms implemented 

in past years in a number of euro area countries. The GDP deflator, which provides 

a broad summary measure of domestic price pressures, remained broadly stable in 

annual terms in the third quarter due to the fact that the decline in the annual rate 

of change in unit labour costs was compensated for by a noticeable increase in the 

annual growth rate of profit margins. Looking through individual quarterly outturns, the 

annual rate of growth in the GDP deflator has gradually increased since mid-2014.
Looking ahead, on the basis of current oil futures prices, the expected path of annual HICP inflation in 2016 is now significantly lower than that forecast 

in the December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the 
euro area. Annual HICP inflation is expected to remain at very low or negative levels 

in the coming months and to pick up only later in 2016, supported by the impact of 
monetary policy measures and the expected economic recovery.
Indicators of inflation expectations have fallen since the beginning of 
December against the backdrop of declining oil prices. Following the 
Governing Council meeting in December, market-

based indicators of inflation expectations declined 

markedly as markets reversed the strong gains 

made in the days leading up to the meeting. The 

renewed sharp decline in oil prices in January led 

to further falls, with most measures returning to the 

levels observed at the beginning of October. More 

specifically, the five-year inflation-linked swap rate five 

years ahead declined from 1.79% to 1.57% between 

2 December 2015 and 20 January 2016. Despite low 

realised inflation and declining market-based inflation 

indicators, the deflation risk observed in the market 

continues to be very limited and significantly below 

the levels seen at the end of 2014 and the beginning 

of 2015. According to the latest ECB Survey of 

Professional Forecasters (SPF), the expected five-
year ahead inflation rate edged downwards from 1.9% 

to 1.8% (see Chart 8). The decline in expectations has 

been more evident over shorter horizons, reflecting the 

impact of the renewed decline in oil prices.Chart 8Survey-based measures of inflation expectations(annual percentage changes)-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

2.0
20132014201520162017201820192020
SPF Q1 2016
SPF Q4 2015
Consensus Economics forecasts
December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections
HICP
Sources: ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), Consensus Economics and ECB calculations. 
Notes: Realised HICP data are included up to December 2015. Consensus Economics 

forecasts are based on the January 2016 forecasts for 2016 and 2017 and on the 
October 2015 long-term forecasts for 2018 and 2020.13Turning to house price developments, annual growth in the ECB™s residential 
property price indicator for the euro area has increased further.
  In the 
third quarter of 2015 the annual rate of change was 1.5%, up from 1.1% in the 
previous two quarters, suggesting that the recovery is gaining some momentum. It 
appears to be relatively broad-based across euro area countries but there remains 
considerable heterogeneity in the magnitudes of growth. The pick-up in house price 

growth in the euro area as a whole is consistent with improving household income 
and employment conditions, favourable financing conditions and the correction of 
previous overvaluations of house prices.5 Money and creditBroad money growth remained robust. The annual growth rate of M3 stayed solid 
at 5.1% in November, with base effects mainly accounting for the slight decrease 

from the 5.3% registered for October (see Chart 9). Money growth was once again concentrated in the most liquid components of the narrow monetary aggregate 
M1, the annual growth rate of which decreased in November while remaining at 
high levels. Overall, recent developments in narrow money are consistent with a 
continuation of the economic recovery in the euro area.Overnight deposits continued to contribute strongly 

to M3 growth: the main factors behind this growth were the low opportunity costs of holding the most 
liquid components of money and the impact of the 
ECB™s expanded asset purchase programme (APP). 

By contrast, short-term deposits other than overnight 
deposits continued to contract, albeit to a lesser 
extent than in previous months. The growth rate of 

marketable instruments (i.e. M3 minus M2), which has 
a small weight in M3, remained positive, reflecting the 
recovery in money market fund shares/units observed 
since mid-2014 and the robust growth of monetary 
financial institution (MFI) debt securities in the money-
holding sector with a maturity of up to two years. The 

said recovery in money market fund shares/units 
confirms market resilience to the negative interest rate 
environment.Broad money growth was again mainly driven by 
domestic sources. From a counterpart perspective, 
the largest source of money creation in November was the bond purchases made 

by the Eurosystem in the context of the public sector purchase programme (PSPP). 

In addition, money creation continued to be supported by credit from MFIs to the 

euro area private sector and the reduction in the MFI longer-term financial liabilities 

(excluding capital and reserves) of the money-holding sector. This reflects the flatness 

of the yield curve, linked to the ECB™s non-standard monetary policy measures, which 

has reduced incentives to hold longer-term assets. It also highlights the Eurosystem™s 
Chart 9M3 and loans to the private sector(annual rate of growth and annualised six-month growth rate)-4
-2
0
246810
12
20082009201020112012201320142015
M3 (annual growth rate)
M3 (annualised six-month growth rate)
loans to the private sector (annual growth rate)
loans to the private sector (annualised six-month growth rate)
Source: ECB.Note: The latest observation is for November 2015. 
14purchases of covered bonds under the third covered bond purchase programme 
(CBPP3), which reduce the availability of such securities for the money-holding 

sector. Furthermore, the Eurosystem™s targeted longer-term refinancing operations 

(TLTROs), an alternative source of longer-term funding, have been curbing banks™ 

issuance activities. The contribution to annual M3 growth made by the MFI sector™s 

net external asset position remained negative. This reflects capital outflows from the 

euro area and is consistent with an ongoing portfolio rebalancing in favour of non-
euro area instruments (there has been a lower appetite for euro area assets on the 

part of foreign investors). Euro area government bonds sold by non-residents under 

the PSPP account for the portfolio rebalancing.
Lending to the euro area private sector continued on a path of gradual recovery.
3 The annual growth rate of MFI loans to the private sector (adjusted 
for sales and securitisation) increased further in November (see Chart 9), with 
both loans to non-financial corporations (NFCs) and households accounting for 
the progress. Although the annual growth rate of loans to NFCs remained weak, 

it has recovered substantially from the trough of the first quarter of 2014. The 

ECB™s monetary policy measures and further easing of bank credit standards have 

supported this development. Despite these positive signs, the ongoing consolidation 
of bank balance sheets and persistently high levels of non-performing loans in some 
jurisdictions continue to hamper loan growth.Bank lending rates for NFCs and households 
remained broadly stable in November 
(see Chart 10). Despite recent signs of stabilisation, composite lending rates for NFCs and households have 
declined by significantly more than market reference 
rates since the ECB™s credit easing package was 

announced in June 2014. This development is related 

to receding fragmentation in euro area financial markets 
and the improvement in the pass-through of monetary 
policy measures to bank lending rates. Furthermore, the 

decline in composite lending rates has been supported 
by a decrease in banks™ composite funding costs, which 

stand at historically low levels. Between May 2014 and November 2015, the composite lending rate on loans 
to euro area NFCs fell by more than 80 basis points to 2.12%. And, over the same period, the composite 

lending rate on loans to households for house purchase 
decreased by more than 60 basis points, reaching 
2.27% in November. Moreover, the spread between 

interest rates charged on very small loans (loans of  
up to •0.25 million) and those charged on large loans (loans of above •1 million) in 
the euro area decreased further in November. This indicates that small and  
3 On 21 September 2015, the ECB published new data on loans adjusted for sales and securitisation, 
based on an enhanced adjustment method. For more details, see the box entitled ﬁNew data on loans 
to the private sector adjusted for sales and securitisationﬂ in Issue 7 / 2015 of the Economic Bulletin.Chart 10Composite bank lending rates for NFCs and households(percentages per annum)2.0
3.0

4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
20082009201020112012201320142015
non-financial corporations
households for house purchase
Source: ECB. Notes: The indicator for the composite bank lending rates is calculated by aggregating 

short and long-term rates using a 24-month moving average of new business volumes. 
The latest observation is for November 2015.15medium-sized enterprises have benefited to a larger extent than large firms from the recent lending rate developments.The January 2016 euro area bank lending survey (BLS) suggests that changes in credit standards and loan demand continue to support the recovery in loan 
growth (see survey at: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/money/surveys/lend/html/

index.en.html). In the fourth quarter of 2015, banks further eased (in net terms) credit standards for loans to NFCs. There was also a net easing of credit standards 

for loans to households for house purchase, marking a reversal from previous 
tightening. Increased competition remained the main factor driving less stringent 
credit standards. Net loan demand by NFCs and households rose considerably on 
the back of the low general level of interest rates. Financing needs related to working 
capital and fixed investment, consumer confidence and housing market prospects 
were additional factors behind stronger loan demand. NFCs™ net issuance of debt securities rose modestly in November 2015.
 The turnaround in net issuance was supported by the observed temporary decline in 
the cost of market-based debt financing during November. By contrast, the ongoing 

strong growth of retained earnings has most likely been a dampening factor in recent 
months. Note that, in the third quarter of 2015, retained earnings still featured a 
double-digit annual growth rate.The overall nominal cost of external financing for NFCs is estimated to have increased moderately in December 2015 and in the first half of January 2016. 
This rise is mainly explained by the higher cost of equity financing (there was a 
visible decrease in share prices), with the cost of debt financing remaining almost 
unchanged. In December 2015 and mid-January 2016 the cost of equity and market-
based debt financing was, on average, around 40 and 20 basis points higher, 

respectively, than in November 2015.
16Box 1 What is driving Brazil™s economic 

downturn?Following rapid economic growth in the years preceding the recent global financial crisis, Brazil was in a strong position to weather the Great Recession. Both the commodity price cycle and abundant capital inflows played a role in this improved economic performance. The improvement was also the result of the 
profound changes in macroeconomic policy management introduced a decade previously, with the end of fiscal dominance and hyperinflation in 1994. However, 
Brazil™s economic situation has deteriorated significantly in recent years. The 
economy entered into recession in 2014 and the situation worsened in 2015, with 
real GDP likely to have declined by 3%, while inflation has remained close to 10%. 
This box outlines the main factors underlying the economic slump in Brazil.The downturn of the non-energy commodity 
price cycle revealed the underlying structural weaknesses in the Brazilian economy.
 In the first decade of the century, Brazil benefitted from strong 
demand Œ particularly from China Œ for some of its key 
export commodities (e.g. iron ore, soybeans and raw sugar). Supported by positive terms of trade effects, 
Brazil™s annual GDP growth rate averaged 3.1% 
over this period. Since the fall in commodity prices in 2011 (see Chart A), these terms of trade effects 
have reversed. As a result, GDP growth has been 
consistently lower than predicted, while structural 
weaknesses underlying the economy have resurfaced. These weaknesses include a burdensome tax system, a sizeable informal sector, poor infrastructure, limited 
competition, the high costs of starting a business and high tariff rates.
Moreover, imbalances rose amid expansionary 
policies and strong capital inflows. Around the turn 
of the decade, Brazil continued to receive strong capital inflows, which amounted 

annually to around 9% of GDP. While these inflows kept sovereign and corporate 

spreads low, they fuelled a strong appreciation of the Brazilian real that hurt price 
competitiveness. Many companies, including large oil companies such as state-owned Petrobras, took advantage of the loose financing conditions to borrow 
on international markets to finance long-term investments. At the same time, 
monetary and fiscal policy was expansionary. The official interest rate was cut to a 

historic low of 7.25% in October 2012 (see Chart B), while subsidised public sector 
lending, coupled with a rise in tax exemptions to revive business confidence, 
sharply increased fiscal deficits. Given the lack of structural reforms, however, 
Chart AGDP growth and major export commodity prices
(left-hand scale: index 2000=100; right-hand scale: annual percentage changes)02004006008001,0001,2001,4001,60020002002200420062008201020122014-6-4-20246810real GDP growth (right-hand scale)soybeans (left-hand scale)sugar (left-hand scale)iron ore (left-hand scale)Sources: World Bank, CBOT Œ CME Group and IBGE Œ Instituto Brasileiro de 

17these measures led to only a moderate and temporary pick-up in GDP growth in 
2012-13, while also contributing to rising inflation and a widening of the current 
account deficit (see Chart C).The shift in global financial market sentiment amid the US Federal Reserve™s 
announcement that it would wind down asset purchases (the ﬁtaper tantrumﬂ) in May 2013 had a significant impact on the Brazilian economy. 
Global market sentiment suddenly turned against vulnerable emerging market economies with high external and fiscal imbalances, such as Brazil. Despite indications of an 
impending recession, monetary and fiscal policies were tightened in an attempt to restore macroeconomic credibility. In order to limit capital outflows and support the 
exchange rate, the Banco Central do Brasil raised its official interest rate to 14.25% 
in July 2015. On the fiscal front, limits on subsidised lending programs were cut and price subsidies were reduced. At the same time, however, the deterioration in global 

financial market conditions and the rise in interest rates entailed a surge in interest payments  on public borrowing (to around 9% of GDP), which, in turn, raised gross public debt to historical highs (63% of GDP). As the country was unable to generate 
the fiscal surplus needed to stabilise debt with a sufficiently credible fiscal plan, two 
rating agencies downgraded Brazil from its investment grade rating for the first time in seven years. Notwithstanding the contraction of Brazilian GDP, inflation surged to 
over 10% in the last two months of 2015, owing to an adjustment of regulated prices 
and the sharp depreciation of the currency.
Model estimates suggest that the recent downturn in Brazil is, to a large extent, driven by a combination of domestic factors and lower commodity prices. According to the historical decomposition from a structural Bayesian VAR 
Chart BInflation rate, overnight rate and real effective 
exchange rate(left-hand scale: index 2006=100; right-hand scale: annual percentage changes)7080901001101201301401501602006200820102012201402468
1012141618inflation rate (right-hand scale)overnight rate (right-hand scale)REER (left-hand scale)Sources: World Bank, CBOT Œ CME Group and IBGE Œ Instituto Brasileiro de 


Notes: The SELIC rate is the Brazilian Central Bank™s overnight rate. REER stands for 



a depreciation of the currency.
Chart CTotal public sector balance and current account 
balance (relative to GDP)(percent of GDP, four-quarter moving averages)
200520072009201120132015-10-8-6-4-202current account balanceconsolidated public sector nominal deficit
18model1 (see Chart D), the most significant factors in explaining the decline in Brazilian GDP since mid-2014 
have been adverse commodity price developments and shocks to domestic factors, including domestic demand, monetary policy and financing costs. External shocks (defined as global uncertainty shocks and shocks to global financing conditions and foreign demand), on the other hand, have been less significant as a cause of the 
recent slowdown. In particular, the prices of iron ore and 
raw sugar Œ which account for 13% and 5% respectively 
of total exports Œ have been falling since 2011, while the 
price of oil Œ which accounts for 7% of total exports Œ has fallen since 2014. As Brazil is still a net oil importer, 

the main channel through which lower oil prices affect 
GDP is likely to be investment, rather than purely 
the terms of trade, as is the case for net oil exporting countries. Total investment has declined by 6% on 
average since early 2014, partly due to developments at Petrobras, the public oil producer, which accounts 
for 10% of total Brazilian investment and almost 2% 
of GDP. The company had to cut investment by 33% 
in both 2014 and 2015 to adjust to lower oil prices and also in response to a widespread corruption case, triggering confidence effects 

throughout the economy. The direct and indirect effects of the decline in investment 
by Petrobras have been estimated by Brazil™s Ministry of Finance to have subtracted 
around 2 percentage points from GDP growth in 2015. 
Looking ahead, the risks facing Brazil remain on the downside amid uncertainties on fiscal policy and political difficulties which might further reduce confidence.
1 The model used is a structural Bayesian vector autoregression using quarterly seasonally adjusted 
GDP data. The model is estimated from the first quarter of 2000 to the second quarter of 2015 and 
the variables included relate to external conditions, commodity prices, and domestic conditions. In 
particular, the VIX, three-month treasury bills, foreign demand (trade-weighted imports), the oil price, 
non-energy commodity prices, the EMBIG Œ Brazil, real GDP growth and the SELIC target rate are 
included. Structural shock identification is done by imposing sign restrictions on impulse response 
functions.Chart DHistorical shock decomposition of annual real GDP 
growth(left-hand scale: median estimates Œ deviation from long-run mean; right-hand scale: annual percentage changes)-3-2-101234-6-5-4-3-2-10122012201320142015external (left-hand scale)commodities (left-hand scale)domestic (left-hand scale)actual (right-hand scale)
calculations.


quarter of 2015.19Box 2  A closer look at differences between 

industrial gross value added  and industrial productionIndustrial gross value added and industrial production are both very informative indicators of developments in industrial activity.
 Although conceptually similar, there are a number of differences between the two.
1 Looking at the data available for the latest two quarters, the weakness in euro area 
industrial production excluding construction in the second quarter of 2015 was not matched by weakness in the corresponding value added (quarterly growth rates were -0.1% versus 0.4%). In the third quarter of 2015, however, industrial production 
growth provided a more positive picture (growth of 0.2% versus 0.0% for value added). Against this background, this box takes a closer look at the differences 
between these two indicators for the euro area and explains the methodological 
differences that give rise to them. Industrial production is a short-term statistic 
that aims to estimate value added on a monthly basis in order to provide a timely measure of industrial activity. In practice, however, it is difficult to collect value 
added data on a monthly basis, which means that the monthly change in industrial production is typically derived from other sources, including deflated turnover, 

physical production data, labour input and intermediate consumption of raw materials and energy. Gross value added
2, on the other hand, is a quarterly national accounts indicator and is measured by subtracting intermediate consumption from output. 
Industrial production therefore only partly describes the development of industrial value added in terms of volume over a longer period, as the link between industrial production and value added may be affected by changes in input ratios and 
structures of production.Movements in euro area industrial value added and production (excluding construction) differ in terms of absolute levels and quarterly growth rates. Chart A plots both indicators of euro area industrial activity in level terms. It shows 

that for euro area industry excluding construction, the level of value added has, 
for the most part, been higher than that of industrial production since 2000. This 
notwithstanding, both indicators tend to show similar cyclical movements in terms of quarter-on-quarter growth (see Chart B), but there have been marked differences 
of up to 2 percentage points, positive or negative, in some quarters since 2000. The 
1 For a more detailed description of these differences, see Lucke, D. and Weiß, J.-P., ﬁInternational 
comparison of industrial development in the European context Œ the problemsﬂ, Economic Bulletin, Vol. 39, Issue 7, German Institute for Economic Research, 2002, pp. 215-220, and ﬁOverview of Industrial Statistics at the OECDﬂ, available at http://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/overviewofindustrialstatisticsattheoecd.htm.2 Gross value added is one of the main indicators in national accounts and, together with taxes less 

subsidies on products, it comprises gross domestic product (GDP), which on the income side is equal 
to the sum of compensation of employees, taxes on production and imports less subsidies, and gross 
operating surplus.20difference between the two growth rates has been 0.1 percentage point on average 
since 2000. Looking at growth differences in absolute terms, the average as well as 
standard deviation has been 0.4 percentage point since 2000. This outcome implies 
that the differences in growth rates seen in the second and third quarter of 2015 
were in a range one could expect.Differences in the movements of the two indicators also occur at the euro area country level, but to a varying degree. Among the four largest euro area countries, 
the difference between the quarter-on-quarter growth in industrial value added and 

industrial production (excluding construction) since 2000 has been greatest for Spain (0.4 percentage point), France (0.3) and Italy (0.2), but small for Germany (0.03). 
For five euro area countries this difference in growth over the same period has been 
negative, most markedly for Ireland and Luxembourg (both -0.6 percentage point). It should be borne in mind, however, that these results are also dependent on the 
period under investigation. For example, for Germany Œ where more historical data are available Œ the slight positive bias in growth rates for the period from 2000 turns 
slightly negative if the observation period starts in 1991. In addition to conceptual factors, a number of other factors contribute to the differences between the two indicators,3 such as seasonal adjustment on an infra-annual basis, as value added is adjusted at a quarterly frequency and 3 See the box entitled ﬁDifferences between industrial production and value added data in industry in 
the first quarter of 2004ﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, August 2004. It examined the difference between industrial production and value added in the first quarter of 2004 (industrial production growth was 
0.2 percentage point compared with value added growth of 0.9 percentage point; according to the 
revised data as of the time of writing, these figures are 0.2 percentage point and 0.8 percentage 
point respectively). The difference was attributed to seasonal adjustment and geographical coverage. 
Geographical coverage has improved considerably since 2004. Where country data is missing, 
estimates are used for the euro area aggregate.Chart ALevel of euro area industrial value added and production (excluding construction)(2000=100; gross value added: calendar and seasonally adjusted chain-linked volumes; industrial production index: quarterly average of working day and seasonally 
adjusted monthly data)909510010511011512020002002200420062008201020122014industrial value added excluding constructionindustrial production excluding constructionSources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Chart BGrowth in euro area industrial value added and production (excluding construction)(quarter-on-quarter growth rates; gross value added: calendar and seasonally adjusted chain-linked volumes; industrial production index: quarterly average of working day and 
seasonally adjusted monthly data; percentage points)-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.01.52.0-10-8-6-4-202420002002200420062008201020122014industrial value added excluding construction(left-hand scale)industrial production excluding construction (left-hand scale)difference between value added and industrial production growth (right-hand scale)Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.21industrial production at a monthly frequency. 
In order to quantify this factor, industrial production data 
were seasonally adjusted across euro area countries at a quarterly frequency. The outcome, which depends on 
the parameters applied for the seasonal filters, shows that quarterly growth rates can differ substantially 
depending on whether the seasonal adjustment is monthly or quarterly (see Chart C). Using data that 
are seasonally adjusted on a quarterly rather than a monthly basis, the average absolute difference between 
the growth rates of euro area industrial production is shown to have been 0.5 percentage point since 2000. On average, however, the impact of the other factors 

remains sizeable.Prices are treated differently in the two indicators. Gross value added is compiled using basic prices and does not include taxes (less subsidies) on products, whereas industrial production is at factor cost. The 
difference between value added at basic prices and at 
factor cost is other taxes (less subsidies) on production, figures for which are not available in volume terms at a quarterly frequency. In addition, whereas gross value added volumes are calculated 
using annual chain-linking, only a few countries so far apply this for industrial production.Different economic activities are included in the two indicators. Value added 
includes water supply, sewerage, waste management and remediation activities 
(Section E4 ), whereas industrial production does not. The share of this activity in 
industrial value added excluding construction since 2000 has varied between 4.2% in 2007 and 5.0% in 2009. Chain-linked volume value added series for this sector are only published at an annual frequency and are rather acyclical. Calculations breaking down these annual data into quarterly data indicate that the quarter-on-quarter difference in the growth rate of industrial value added and production remains, on 
average, at a similar magnitude. Nevertheless, for specific quarters, the impact of Section E is found to be sizeable, i.e. up to 2.2 percentage points during the Great 
Recession and up to 0.8 percentage point during ﬁnormalﬂ times. A further source of difference between the two indicators is that industrial production typically covers firms above a certain threshold (in terms of turnover or number of employees), with thresholds varying across countries. National accounts attempt to provide a more complete picture by using data from a variety of alternative sources. 4 These activities form Section E of the Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European 
Community (NACE Rev. 2).Chart CThe effects of seasonal adjustment on data measuring 
growth in euro area industrial production (excluding construction)(quarter-on-quarter growth rates; percentage points)-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.01.52.0-12-10-8-6-4-202420002002200420062008201020122014seasonal adjustment at quarterly frequency(left-hand scale)seasonal adjustment at monthly frequency(left-hand scale)difference between seasonal adjustment at quarterly and monthly frequency(right-hand scale)Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.22All in all, despite the close link between value added and industrial production, the differences between the two indicators reflect all of the above-mentioned factors to some degree, although their relative importance is difficult to assess. From an economic perspective, it is useful to monitor both indicators to assess the economic status of industrial activity. Further harmonisation between 

national accounts and short-term statistics, as well as between national practices for seasonal adjustment, would help to reduce these differences.
23Box 3  Eurosystem publishes more detailed 
criteria for accepting rating agencies The Eurosystem has published more detailed criteria that rating agencies must meet to be part of its framework for mitigating financial risk in monetary policy operations. The Eurosystem credit assessment framework or ECAF defines the minimum credit quality requirements that ensure the Eurosystem accepts only assets with high credit standards as collateral. The Eurosystem has a legal obligation to 
lend money only against adequate collateral.1 The ECAF also forms the basis of 
minimum credit quality requirements in the context of outright purchases.Rating agencies are one source of information in the framework.2 When rating agencies are accepted under the framework as ﬁexternal credit assessment institutionsﬂ or ECAIs, their ratings are used mainly to assess the credit quality of marketable assets (traded debt instruments, in particular bonds). Rating agencies can also be accepted under the framework as providers of rating tools. In addition, the Eurosystem uses information from in-house credit assessment systems and counterparties™ internal ratings-based systems. The last three types of credit 
assessment system are used mainly to assess non-marketable collateral such 
as credit claims. To ensure that the information provided by all four sources is 
consistent, accurate and comparable, the Eurosystem has established acceptance criteria for each credit assessment source as well as a harmonised rating scale, against which it regularly monitors the performance of all accepted systems. These 
procedures aim to protect the Eurosystem against financial risks as well as to ensure 
a level playing field among the credit rating providers.In December 2015 the Governing Council decided to publish further details on the criteria for accepting a rating agency into the ECAF.
3 The published 
criteria refer to the acceptance of rating agencies as external credit assessment institutions. An agency must, at the time of its application, be providing minimum 
coverage of assets eligible for use in monetary policy operations in terms of rated assets4, rated issuers and the volume of assets rated. The rating agency™s coverage 
must be diversified across the eligible asset classes and across euro area countries. 1 See Article 18.1 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central 
Bank.2 See, for example, the Box entitled ﬁEurosystem credit assessment framework for monetary policy 

operationsﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, April 2014; The financial risk management of the Eurosystem™s monetary policy operations, ECB, July 2015; or the information provided on the ECB™s website at  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/assets/risk/ecaf/html/index.en.html3 See Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest 

rates), 22 January 2016, on the ECB™s website. The detailed requirements are available on the ECB™s 
website at https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/coll/risk/ecaf/html/index.en.html4 Assets must be rated in accordance with the ECAF priority rules defined in Article 84 of the Guideline 

of the ECB of 19 December 2014 on the implementation of the Eurosystem monetary policy framework 
(ECB/2014/60). 24For example, it must rate at least three of the four eligible non-public sector asset classes (covered bonds, uncovered bonds, corporate bonds and asset-backed securities) in two-thirds of the countries. In each asset class it must provide ratings for at least 10% of the eligible assets, 10% of the issuers and 20% of the nominal volume. Moreover, in the three years prior to its application the rating agency must 
have complied with these criteria at a level of at least 80%. The requirements are designed to ensure that rating agencies have broad 
credit risk expertise and a track record over time. For efficiency reasons and 
in order to ensure that only rating agencies with established and broad credit risk 
expertise are accepted, the requirements take into account market acceptance 
of rating agencies™ ratings, the credit risk interlinkages
5 among the eligible asset classes, and the geographical concentration of eligible collateral in the euro area. At the same time, the thresholds are not so restrictive as to preclude the acceptance of new rating agencies: a rating agency assessing around 100 issuers, for example, may comply with the requirements, depending on the geographical and asset-class focus of its business.6 Furthermore, the set of coverage criteria as a whole is designed to ensure that the Eurosystem has information to ascertain whether a rating agency has an adequate performance track record and to map its ratings to the harmonised rating scale. In addition, the 80% historical coverage requirement over the three years preceding an application allows new rating agencies to benefit from a gradual increase in their European coverage in order to apply to be accepted into the ECAF once they can demonstrate well-established broad credit risk expertise and proven market acceptance.In the acceptance procedure, the Eurosystem investigates all additional information relevant for risk protection and the efficient implementation of the 
ECAF.
7 Compliance with the minimum coverage criteria serves only as a prerequisite for the initiation of an acceptance procedure. In view of the importance of the credit quality information for asset eligibility and valuation haircuts, the Eurosystem forms its decision on whether to accept a rating agency on the basis of a comprehensive due diligence assessment. Rating agencies must meet a number of information, regulatory and operational requirements. To be part of the framework they must, for 
example, be supervised by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA). 
Furthermore, information on their credit ratings needed to monitor rating quality must 
be available to the Eurosystem. For efficiency purposes and in view of the resource-
intensive due diligence process for each individual rating agency, the Eurosystem 
requires the minimum coverage criteria to be met before it considers accepting a new rating agency.
 In addition, the Eurosystem is reinforcing its due diligence to avoid mechanistic reliance on external ratings. It is carrying out additional work to better understand the ratings, rating processes and methodologies of the rating 5 For example, rating structured finance products requires a sound credit risk assessment of the 
counterparties involved.6 One credit rating agency with a market share of around 1% (according to calculations of the European 

Securities and Markets Authority) currently complies with the ECAF coverage criteria.7 For the general acceptance criteria for external credit assessment institutions, which have been public 

since the introduction of the ECAF, see Article 120 of the Guideline ECB/2014/60. 25agencies accepted in the ECAF. This is in line with various initiatives by international 
authorities aimed at reducing over-reliance on external ratings in legal, regulatory and other public frameworks.8 In parallel, the Eurosystem has enhanced its internal credit assessment capabilities, for example by increasing the number of in-house 
credit assessment systems for non-financial corporations9 and by establishing a due diligence process in the context of the asset-backed securities and covered bond 
purchase programmes.8 See, for example, the roadmap for reducing reliance on credit rating agencies™ ratings, as published 
by the G20™s Financial Stability Board, at http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/r_101027.pdf?page_moved=19 See, for example, Thematic Review 
on FSB Principles for Reducing Reliance on CRA Ratings
, Financial Stability Board, May 2014, at http://www.fsb.org/2014/05/r_140512/26Article Recent developments in the 
composition and cost of bank funding  in the euro areaChanges in the composition and cost of bank funding have important implications for the provision of credit and, consequently, for economic output and inflation. 
Banks™ funding costs are affected by monetary policy, but the transmission of policy 
depends on many factors, including the strength of banks™ balance sheets and the 
macroeconomic environment. Therefore, developments in bank funding can be 
different across euro area banks and countries. This article gives an overview of 
recent developments in the composition and cost of bank funding, including capital, and shows that they varied across the euro area over the period of the financial 
crisis, which had an impact on the transmission of monetary policy. The interaction 
between monetary policy measures (both standard and non-standard) and banks™ 
funding conditions is also discussed. 1 IntroductionDuring the financial crisis, a large degree of heterogeneity in the cost of bank 
credit was linked to a divergence in funding conditions across euro area banks. Understanding banks™ funding conditions is vital for the analysis of credit 
provision to the real economy and, consequently, of output and inflation, particularly 
in the light of the fact that funding cost dynamics diverged from monetary policy rates during the crisis.1 In general, banks seek funding from retail and wholesale sources. Retail funding, i.e. deposits from the private sector, is generally the dominant source 
of funding, and deposits from the non-financial private sector tend to be less volatile than wholesale funding sources, particularly when protected by deposit guarantee schemes. However, the importance of such sources for a bank™s overall funding 
depends on institutional features such as the bank™s size or business model. For 
small euro area banks, in particular, retail deposits account for a considerably 
larger share of overall funding than wholesale sources.2 Wholesale funding includes interbank liabilities, which are used for short-term liquidity management, and the issuance of debt securities. Finally, banks also have access to central bank liquidity 
and raise capital, normally in the form of equity.
1 For a discussion, see Illes, A., Lombardi, M.J. and Mizen, P., ﬁWhy did bank lending rates diverge from 
policy rates after the financial crisis?ﬂ, BIS Working Papers, No 486, February 2015.2 See ﬁReport on financial structuresﬂ, ECB, October 2015.
27A well-functioning banking sector is essential for the effective transmission of monetary policy.
 This applies in particular to the euro area, where banks play a 
dominant role in providing external financing to the non-financial private sector. The 
outbreak of the financial and sovereign debt crisis in 2010 affected all segments of 
the financial system, especially the banking sector, which hampered the transmission 
of the ECB™s monetary policy measures to bank funding and, ultimately, to bank 
lending conditions. Moreover, bank funding conditions were heterogeneous across 
euro area countries in an environment of sluggish economic activity, high sovereign 

debt and concerns about weak banks. While differences in funding costs are to be 
expected, high levels of uncertainty led to excessive risk premia in some jurisdictions and there were periods when banks™ access to wholesale and, to a lesser extent, 
retail funding was severely hampered. At the same time, the ECB™s non-standard 
monetary policy measures (such as the policy of full allotment of the liquidity 
demanded by banks at a fixed rate and the two three-year longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) in late 2011 and early 2012) acted as a strong backstop and 
prevented a disorderly and forced deleveraging that would have had a considerable negative impact on the overall economy. Since then, steps towards banking union, 
the ECB™s credit easing package announced in mid-2014, and the expanded asset 
purchase programme (APP) announced in early 2015 have led to a significant improvement in bank funding conditions, which have become more homogeneous 
across countries. This has helped to weaken the bank-sovereign nexus, thereby 
considerably reducing impairments in the transmission mechanism.The funding and capital structures of banks are of interest for a number of reasons. The determinants of banks™ funding and capital structures are distinct 
from those of non-financial corporations.3 Banks are subject to capital regulation because of the significant effect they can have on financial stability and economic 
growth: given that they are largely funded by deposits, a significant share of which are covered by guarantee schemes, banks are required to hold minimum amounts of capital to absorb losses and mitigate moral hazard concerns.4 While this implies that the relative cost of equity and debt funding is not the main determinant of banks™ 

capital structures, it does not mean that their cost is irrelevant. In fact, the cost of capital is an important factor in banks™ portfolio allocation decisions, including 
lending activity. Recent developments in the European supervisory, regulatory and 
resolution framework Œ including macroprudential capital buffers, total loss-absorbing 
capacity (TLAC) requirements and the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) Œ help to rectify incentives that are misaligned because of the expectation of 
public support (the too-big-to-fail problem). The effect of these measures on banks™ 
cost of funding is a priori unclear, as the direct effect of a reduction in implicit public 
sector support is at least partially offset by decreased risk-taking by banks. While 
the transition to the revised regulatory framework may constrain lending in the short term, it is expected to increase economic welfare in the medium to long term, as the 
negative externalities associated with systemic crises are contained.53 See Berger, A., Herring, R. and Szego, G., ﬁThe role of capital in financial institutionsﬂ, 
Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 19, Issues 3-4, June 1995, pp. 393-430.4 See Gropp, R. and Heider, F., ﬁThe Determinants of Bank Capital Structureﬂ, 
Review of Finance, Vol. 14, 2010, pp. 587-622.5 See the speech by ECB Vice-President Vítor Constâncio, ﬁFinancial regulation and the global 

recoveryﬂ, at the Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference, Washington D.C., 16 April 2015.28This article is structured as follows: Section 2 presents the main developments in the composition of banks™ funding and capital structures and discusses the monetary 
policy measures that have had an impact on funding quantities, Section 3 discusses developments in the cost of funding and capital and the impact of certain monetary policy measures on these costs, and Section 4 concludes.2 The composition of funding and the impact of monetary 
policyThe structure of banks™ funding and capital is integral to the overall stability 
and cost of funding. During the crisis, there were changes not only in banks™ overall 
funding levels, but also in the structure of their funding. This section discusses some 

of the main changes in euro area banks™ funding over the past decade and compares 
developments in vulnerable and less vulnerable countries.6 Banks are defined here as credit institutions and other monetary financial institutions (MFIs) that are resident 
in the euro area. The impact of monetary policy measures on funding quantities and 
composition is also discussed.The composition of euro area banks™ funding has fluctuated over the past 
decade, reflecting changes in economic conditions, uncertainty and the monetary policy response to the crisis. Banks™ overall funding grew in line with 
the expansion in their assets until the escalation of the financial crisis following the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers and the resulting increase in uncertainty in interbank markets. Chart 1 shows annual flows in the main liabilities of MFIs, including capital. 
Funding flows increased steadily from 2005 until the end of 2007, particularly via wholesale funding sources, which include external (non-euro area) liabilities, interbank funding and shorter-term debt securities and tend to be more volatile than retail deposit funding. While growth in these wholesale funding sources facilitated the fast expansion of banks™ balance sheets in the years leading up to the crisis, the 

outflows and swift withdrawals observed at the start of the crisis made a significant contribution to bank funding pressures and a reduction in liquidity. Increased reliance 
on these funding sources is likely to have introduced a pro-cyclical bias in financial intermediation.7 Deposits from resident non-MFIs, and deposits from the non-financial private sector in particular, are the most stable and single largest component of 

funding for euro area banks.
 While the composition of these deposits varies across 
countries and bank types, they are the predominant source of funding for banks in both vulnerable and less vulnerable countries.8 Retail deposits tend to be a more 6 Throughout this article, the term ﬁvulnerable countriesﬂ refers to countries more directly affected by 
the crisis, namely Ireland, Greece, Spain, Italy, Cyprus, Portugal and Slovenia, while the term ﬁless 
vulnerable countriesﬂ refers to the remaining euro area countries.7 For a discussion, see Shin, H.S. and Shin, K., ﬁProcyclicality and Monetary Aggregatesﬂ, 
NBER 
Working Papers, No 16836, February 2011.8 Non-MFI deposits include deposits from households, non-financial corporations, general government, 

insurance corporations, pension funds and other financial institutions. 29stable source of funding than wholesale sources:9 since the liquidity services banks provide to depositors can incur transaction and switching costs, retail deposits are less susceptible to unanticipated withdrawals.10 Moreover, as withdrawals are based 
on individual liquidity needs they tend to be more predictable, on the basis of the law 
of large numbers. In addition, deposits are generally insured up to a limit and are less subject to adverse shocks related to uncertainty. 
As the financial crisis intensified with the collapse of Lehman Brothers, deposit flows fell, but remained robust relative to the other, more volatile 
sources of funding in both vulnerable and less vulnerable countries. Since changes in deposit levels are associated with changes in income and 
general economic conditions, the reduction in flows reflected, at least in part, the deterioration in the macroeconomic environment across the euro area.11 As the 
sovereign debt and financial market stress intensified, deposit outflows became more pronounced in vulnerable countries, driven largely by a repatriation of funds by non-domestic depositors (both from other euro area countries and from outside the euro area). After reaching a peak in mid-2012, deposit outflows from vulnerable 
countries subsided and fragmentation in funding across the euro area receded. This can be explained largely by the ECB™s announcement of Outright Monetary 
Transactions (OMTs) and the decision taken at the June 2012 euro area summit by 
9 For a discussion on the stable nature of retail deposits relative to wholesale funding, see Huang, 
 R. and Ratnovski, L., ﬁThe dark side of bank wholesale fundingﬂ, Working Paper Series, No 1223,  ECB, July 2010.10 See Song, F. and Thakor, A., ﬁRelationship Banking, Fragility, and the Asset-Liability Matching 
Problemﬂ, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 20(6), 2007, pp. 2129-2177.11 See Cohen, B. and Kaufman, G., ﬁFactors Determining Bank Deposit Growth by State: An Empirical 

Analysisﬂ, Journal of Finance, Vol. 20, Issue 1, 1965, pp. 59-70.Chart 1Developments in funding of MFIs other than the Eurosystem (EUR billions; annual flows by quarter)123-2,000-1,500-1,000-50005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,500200520072009201120132015deposits  non-MFIsdebt securitiesexternal liabilitiescapital and reservesdeposits  MFIsa)Euro area123-1,500-1,000-50005001,0001,5002,0002,500200520072009201120132015c)Less vulnerable countries123-1,000-50005001,0001,500200520072009201120132015b) Vulnerable countriesSources: ECB and ECB calculations. Notes: The chart highlights three periods: 1. the collapse of Lehman Brothers, 2. the announcement of OMTs, and 3. the introduction of the credit easing package. The analysis is 

based on aggregate MFI data: deposits from other MFIs include operations between banks belonging to the same economic group. The components constitute MFIs™ main liabilities 


ending in the third quarter of 2015. Deposits of MFIs include both interbank funding and funding from the Eurosystem.30European leaders to deepen European integration in accordance with the long-term objective of creating a banking, fiscal and political union, as well as the decision to launch the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM).12 While deposit flows in vulnerable countries recovered following these announcements, they remained weak relative 
to pre-crisis levels and then began to decline in an environment of low inflation and subdued income growth. Following the introduction by the ECB of further credit easing measures in the middle of 2014 and the announcement of the expanded APP 
at the beginning of 2015, deposit flows improved in an environment of increased central bank liquidity. 
The sources of wholesale market funding that had increased in the years 
preceding the collapse of Lehman Brothers decreased rapidly at the start of 
the crisis, with debt securities issuance and interbank activity in particular 

slumping (see Chart 1). In vulnerable countries, as interbank funding deteriorated, 
banks continued to issue securities. A proportion of these were covered by government 
guarantees, whose aim was to support bank funding over this period.13 However, 
issuance diminished as uncertainty and fears regarding the solvency of sovereigns 
increased. While market risks receded in the middle of 2012, there was a second 
stage of negative net issuance of debt securities by banks at this time, partly reflecting 
the correction of excessive leverage of the financial and non-financial sectors, as well 
as a move towards a more comprehensive regulatory and supervisory framework. 
Moreover, debt securities funding was replaced by Eurosystem liquidity because 
the cost of the latter was more favourable. Overall deposit flows from MFIs, which 

include interbank and Eurosystem funding, decreased as the financial crisis intensified 
(see Chart 1). Crucially, however, the composition of the deposits changed as more 
volatile interbank liquidity was partially replaced by central bank liquidity (see Chart 2). 
Interbank liquidity grew in the years before the financial crisis, reflecting increased 
international interlinkages among banks as cross-border lending increased over time. 

With the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the use of interbank deposits as a short-term 
liquidity tool decreased in line with a need to deleverage and amid general uncertainty 
about the creditworthiness of counterparties.14 The financial market stress not only resulted in a shift towards Eurosystem 
liquidity and away from interbank liquidity, particularly in vulnerable countries 

(see Chart 2), there was also a change in the composition of the Eurosystem liquidity, largely owing to the monetary policy response to the crisis.
15 At the 
start of the crisis the ECB switched to a fixed rate full allotment tender procedure 12 See the presentation by ECB Vice-President Vítor Constâncio, ﬁFragmentation and rebalancing in the 
euro areaﬂ, Joint European Commission-ECB Conference on Financial Integration, Brussels,  25 April 2013.13 See the box entitled ﬁThe funding of euro area MFIs through the issuance of debt securitiesﬂ, 
Monthly 
Bulletin, ECB, August 2010, the article entitled ﬁMonetary analysis in an environment of financial turmoilﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, November 2009 and the box entitled ﬁHow are government measures to support the financial system reflected on the balance sheets of euro area credit institutions?ﬂ, 
Monthly Bulletin, ECB, April 2009.14 For a structural model of the money market, where informational asymmetries and concerns about the 

solvency of specific banks can lead to the breakdown of interbank trading, see Heider, F., Hoerova, 
M. and Holthausen, C., ﬁLiquidity hoarding and interbank market spreads: the role of counterparty riskﬂ, 
Working Paper Series, No 1126, ECB, December 2009. 15 For details, see Eser, F., Amaro, M., Iacobelli, S. and Rubens, M., ﬁThe use of the Eurosystem™s 

monetary policy instruments and operational framework since 2009ﬂ, Occasional Paper Series, No 135, ECB, August 2012.31whereby, as long as banks had adequate collateral, their liquidity demands were 
fully satisfied at a rate determined by the Governing Council, which provided certainty and stability to the banking sector.
16 Moreover, the maturity of the liquidity 
was extended by means of LTROs.
17 As the sovereign debt tensions intensified 
and concerns about bank solvency increased, the ECB announced two three-year 
LTROs, the first of which took place at the end of 2011 and the second at the start 
of 2012. The share of outstanding Eurosystem liquidity in banks™ funding increased 
substantially following these operations, reaching its highest level around the middle of 2012. There is evidence that these operations bolstered the supply of 
bank credit and, consequently, output and inflation over the crisis.
18 As part of a 
credit easing package introduced in June 2014, the ECB also announced a series 
of targeted LTROs (TLTROs), providing liquidity with a maturity of up to four years 
and linked to banks™ lending volumes, in order to enhance the functioning of the 
monetary policy transmission mechanism by supporting the provision of credit to the real economy.
19 The weighted average maturity of bank borrowing from the 
Eurosystem increased from around 130 days before the first TLTRO was conducted 
to around 800 days after the settlement of the fifth TLTRO in September 2015.
20 In 16 See Giannone, D., Lenza, M., Pill, H. and Reichlin, L., ﬁNon-standard monetary policy measures and 
monetary developments,ﬂ Working Paper Series, No 1290, ECB, January 2011, and Lenza, M., Pill, H. and Reichlin, L., ﬁMonetary policy in exceptional timesﬂ, Economic Policy, Vol. 25, Issue 62, 2010, pp. 295-339.17 For details, see Eser, F., Carmona Amaro, M., Iacobelli, S. and Rubens, M., ﬁThe use of the 

Eurosystem™s monetary policy instruments and operational framework since 2009ﬂ, Occasional Paper Series, No 135, ECB, August 2012.18 See Darracq-Pariès, M. and De Santis, R., ﬁA non-standard monetary policy shock: the ECB™s 3-Year 

LTROs and the shift in credit supplyﬂ, Working Paper Series, No 1508, ECB, January 2013.19 See the press release on further details of the targeted longer-term refinancing operations published by 

the ECB on 3 July 2014.20 This illustrative calculation assumes that all TLTROs are repaid on their final maturity date in 

September 2018 and are not subject to voluntary or mandatory early repayment. Chart 2Breakdown of MFI deposits at MFIs other than the Eurosystem(EUR billions; monthly outstanding amounts)5001,5002,5003,5004,5005,5006,5007,500200520072009201120132015interbank Eurosystem a) Euro area5007009001,1001,3001,5001,7001,9002,1002,3002,500200520072009201120132015b) Vulnerable countries5001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,500200520072009201120132015c) Less vulnerable countriesSource: ECB.Note: The series for the Eurosystem comprises its lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations denominated in euro and other claims on euro area 

credit institutions denominated in euro.32the July 2015 euro area bank lending survey, banks 
reported that the TLTROs had improved and were 
likely to further improve their liquidity position, market financing conditions and profitability, and that they 
had been and would be used as a substitute for other funding sources, mainly other Eurosystem liquidity operations, maturing debt and interbank lending.21 The Eurosystem also changed the collateral framework 
during the crisis, mainly by expanding the list of assets eligible as collateral in monetary policy operations and by lowering the rating required on assets.22 These changes were essential for the functioning of the 
banking system, particularly when stress in sovereign markets led to rating downgrades. They ensured that 
solvent banks could still access liquidity, in order to 
prevent an escalation of the crisis.23 During the crisis, banks used their highest quality collateral for direct repo transactions in the wholesale markets, while non-marketable collateral was increasingly posted with the Eurosystem (see Chart 3).During the crisis, in addition to the decline in the overall level of interbank liquidity, there was a 
change in its composition, reflecting perceptions of increased counterparty risk. There was a considerable move from unsecured to secured lending, particularly from 2008 
onwards (see Chart 4), as well as a substantial adjustment in activity towards domestic counterparties and away from counterparties from other euro area countries.24 Concerns about counterparty creditworthiness resulted in increased use of central counterparties, which facilitate clearing and settlement in money markets 
by acting as the direct counterparty for both lender and borrower, thereby assuming 
the risk of the borrower defaulting.25 External liabilities increased substantially in the years preceding the crisis 
and facilitated the growth in banks™ balance sheets. 
However, in the wake of 

the Lehman Brothers collapse there was a swift contraction in external liabilities, partly owing to asymmetric information and a sudden rise in risk aversion among 21 See https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/pdf/blssurvey_201507.pdf22 For details on the changes in the collateral framework, see the article entitled ﬁThe Eurosystem 
collateral framework throughout the crisisﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, July 2013.23 See Wolff, G., ﬁEurosystem collateral policy and framework: Was it unduly changed?ﬂ 
Bruegel Policy Contribution, Issue 14, November 2014.24 For detailed developments in euro area money markets, see ﬁEuro money market surveyﬂ, ECB, 

September 2015.25 For more information on interbank funding via central counterparties, see the article entitled ﬁThe 

interplay of financial intermediaries and its impact on monetary analysisﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, January 2012, and the box entitled ﬁThe adjustment of monetary statistics for repurchase agreement 
transactions with central counterpartiesﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, September 2012.Chart 3Use of collateral(EUR billions after valuation and haircuts)05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,00020042006200820102012Q12012Q32013Q12013Q32014Q12014Q32015Q12015Q3central government securitiesregional government securitiesuncovered bank bondscovered bank bondscorporate bondsasset-backed securitiesother marketable assetsnon-marketable assets*credit claims*fixed-term and cash deposits*Source: ECB.Notes: Averages of month-end data over each period.




33international investors.26 The growth in external 
liabilities in the lead-up to the crisis stemmed from deposits of non-euro area residents and holdings by non-residents of shorter-term debt securities issued by euro area banks, and largely reflected the expansion of cross-border interbank liquidity (see Chart 1). This 
facilitated the growth in banks™ balance sheets, as 
deep and liquid cross-border financial markets eased 
quantitative constraints on their liquidity management. However, at the outbreak of the crisis, cross-border 
funding was withdrawn quickly, which increased banks™ 
exposure to adverse global funding pressures.27 For vulnerable countries, external liability flows have 
remained broadly negative since the onset of the crisis. For less vulnerable countries, annual flows have increased recently, and have been generally positive 
since the ECB™s announcement of additional monetary 
policy easing measures in the middle of 2014. The adverse changes in prices and credit losses associated with the crisis led 
to impairments in banks™ capital positions, which, in conjunction with funding 
pressures, often necessitated deleveraging and changes in banks™ liabilities, such as increased 
capital issuance. Chart 5 shows that capital as a percentage of total assets was relatively stable in the pre-crisis period. The subsequent increase in the ratio 
was particularly pronounced for banks in vulnerable 
countries, where levels of assets decreased and levels of capital increased in response not only to regulatory requirements but also to pressure from markets to hold larger discretionary buffers against losses. Over 
this period, in addition to the capital raised in private sector markets, a substantial amount of capital was also obtained through government capital injections.28 The Capital Requirements Directive and Regulation 
(CRD IV/CRR), which came into force in January 2014, increased both the quality and the amount of capital that banks must hold for prudential purposes. In addition, new European legislation has set the stage for the creation of a banking union and addressed gaps in the capital framework that were highlighted by the crisis.26 See Forster, K., Vasardani, M. and Ca™ Zorzi, M., ﬁEuro area cross-border financial flows and the global 
financial crisisﬂ, Occasional Paper Series, No 126, ECB, July 2011.27 See the article entitled ﬁThe supply of money Œ bank behaviour and the implications for monetary 

analysisﬂ, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, October 2011.28 For an overview of government measures to support the banking system, see the article entitled ﬁThe 

fiscal impact of financial support during the crisisﬂ, Economic Bulletin, ECB, Issue 6, 2015.Chart 4Euro area money market volumes(annual indices, 2005=100)050100150200200520072009201120132015unsecuredsecuredSource: ECB.Chart 5
Capital and reserves of euro area MFIs other than the Eurosystem(percentages of total assets)4681012200520072009201120132015euro areavulnerable countriesless vulnerable countriesSource: ECB.Note: Total assets, capital and reserves were derived via notional stocks in order to 



impacting on this measure.34Over the past decade the funding structure of euro area banks has been altered by changes in market risk, the economic environment and monetary policy measures: there is now a greater reliance on more stable funding relative to volatile funding.29 The table shows that MFIs™ increased reliance on 

deposit funding and decreased reliance on debt securities and external liabilities is common to both vulnerable and less vulnerable countries. The table 
also shows the breakdown in MFI deposits between interbank and Eurosystem liquidity, illustrating the fact 
that while the decrease in interbank liquidity has been 
a general phenomenon across the euro area, it has been greatest in vulnerable countries. Reliance on central bank liquidity grew between January 2005 and September 2015 in vulnerable countries, in contrast to the situation in less vulnerable countries. The nature 

of interbank liquidity has also changed from unsecured to secured (see Chart 4), and there has been a reduction in the reliance on cross-
border activities, including with non-euro area counterparties (reflected in the reduced relevance of external liabilities). Vulnerable countries in particular now have 
a substantially larger share of capital in total funding. While this measure of capital differs from the regulatory measure, its increase follows a general improvement in 
solvency and leverage ratios.30 Overall, these changes indicate a move towards a business model with a greater reliance on more stable funding sources.31The structure of banks™ balance sheets and funding will continue to be 

affected by the economic and policy environment, and in particular by the expanded APP, which will inject further liquidity into the banking system. 
The expanded APP, which comprises two private sector asset purchase programmes 

(the asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP) and the third covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3)) and the public sector purchase programme (PSPP), aims to ease financing conditions and bring the path of inflation back in line with price stability.
32 The APP has had a substantial impact on banks™ balance 
sheets: as the Eurosystem pays for the assets it purchases by supplying reserves, purchases are always settled through banks regardless of who the ultimate seller is. In terms of funding, increases in reserves following the introduction of the expanded 29 For a more detailed overview of bank funding trends in the euro area following the crisis, see Van 
Rixtel, A. and Gasperini, G., ﬁFinancial crises and bank funding: recent experience in the euro areaﬂ, 
BIS Working Papers, No 406, March 2013.30 The statistical definition of capital and reserves includes equity capital; non-distributed benefits or 

funds; and specific and general provisions against loans, securities and other types of assets (the 
recording of which may follow national accounting rules). See ﬁManual on MFI balance sheet statisticsﬂ, 
ECB, April 2012.31 See ﬁReport on financial structuresﬂ, ECB, October 2015.
32 Purchases under the expanded APP amount to •60 billion per month and are intended to run until 

the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with its aim of achieving inflation rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. For more details, see  https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/implement/omt/html/index.en.html.Table
Structure of main liabilities of euro area MFIs other than the Eurosystem(percentages of main liabilities)Euro areaVulnerable countriesLess vulnerable countriesJan. 2005Sep. 2015Jan. 2005Sep. 2015Jan. 2005Sep. 2015Deposits Œ non-MFIs354339473442Debt securities181415122015Capital6981368External liabilities151316101515Interbank liabilities231720132419Eurosystem liabilities231621Total (EUR trillions)
19.226.858.114.318.8Source: ECB.Notes: The main liabilities consist of total liabilities excluding remaining liabilities, 
and shares/units issued by money market funds. Remaining liabilities consist of 
volatile components that are separate from the core activities of banks, including in 


in accounting and statistical treatment over the period under review and across 

jurisdictions.35APP have so far been reflected largely in increases in deposits (see Chart 6), which 
partly reflect banks™ intermediation of bond sales to the Eurosystem by euro area 
non-banks. The sizeable decline in net external assets reflects the intermediation 
of sales by non-euro area residents. Credit to governments has declined, which, at least partly, reflects sales of securities to the 

Eurosystem from banks™ own portfolios and contributes 
to the increase in reserves. Chart 6 also shows an increase in credit to the private sector, part of which will 

have contributed to the above-mentioned increase in deposits. According to the April and October 2015 bank lending surveys, the contribution of the APP to euro 
area banks™ profitability and solvency positions has 
been positive overall, even though the effects are varied and differ across countries (see Chart 7). 
Although the APP has led to capital gains associated 
with the valuation of securities held by banks, its effect 
on net interest income is a priori unclear. On the one 
hand, the compression of yields and the flattening of the yield curve have led to lower interest income. This is 
likely to translate into lower unit margins, since liabilities tend to have shorter maturities than assets and are 
less responsive to decreasing interest rates, particularly when they are at very low levels. Furthermore, the APP generates excess liquidity which, if deposited with 
the Eurosystem, is remunerated at a negative rate. On the other hand, these effects are at least partly 
Chart 6Movements in the balance sheet of MFIs other than the Eurosystem that correspond 
to the change in reserve holdings between end-February and end-September 2015(EUR billions; non-seasonally adjusted)200250300350400450500550600650outstandingamount ofclaimson theEurosystem(February2015)borrowingfromEurosystemwholesalefunding (net)depositfundingcapital andreservescredit toprivatesectorcredit togovernmentnet externalassetsotheroutstandingamount ofclaimson theEurosystem(September2015)Sources: ECB and ECB calculations.Notes: Increases in net asset positions reduce claims on the Eurosystem; increases in net liability positions increase claims on the 
Eurosystem. ﬁWholesale funding (net)ﬂ refers to issuance of debt securities net of holdings of MFI debt securities, and borrowing from 
MFIs other than the Eurosystem net of deposits with MFIs other than the Eurosystem.Chart 7Impact of the APP on euro area banks™ profitability and 
capital position, as reported in the April and October 
2015 bank lending surveys(net percentages of respondents)-40-20020406080AprilOctoberAprilOctoberAprilOctobereuro areavulnerable countriesless vulnerable countriesnet interest margincapital gains/lossescapital ratioprofitabilitySource: ECB.

difference between the sum of the percentages of banks responding 

ﬁincreased/improved considerablyﬂ and ﬁincreased/improved somewhatﬂ and the sum 
of the percentages of banks responding ﬁdecreased/deteriorated somewhatﬂ and 
ﬁdecreased/deteriorated considerablyﬂ to the corresponding question in the April and 

October 2015 bank lending surveys. The results shown are calculated as a percentage 

of the number of banks that did not reply ﬁnot applicableﬂ.36offset by the increased intermediation activity and credit quality stemming from the 
programme™s positive impact on output. The APP has made a modest contribution 
to bank profitability in the euro area as a whole, but its impact has been positive for vulnerable countries in particular. For the euro area aggregate, the estimated 
negative effects on net interest income have so far been outweighed by the positive 
effects from capital gains and improved credit quality against the background of the 
APP™s positive impact on economic activity. The effect on the capital ratio has also 
been positive, although the effects have diminished since the initial announcement 

and implementation of the programme.3 The cost of funding and the effects of monetary policy
As the financial crisis escalated, stress in financial markets caused the cost 
of funding for many euro area banks to increase. Uncertainty regarding the health of certain banking markets led not only to outflows, but also to increases in 
risk premia on the funds available to banks. Wholesale funding sources became either unavailable or prohibitively expensive for many banks in vulnerable countries, leading to an increase in recourse to central bank operations, as outlined in Section 2. The observed market fragmentation reflected high uncertainty and 
risk aversion and was at times greater than would be expected given the actual 
underlying risks. Since the degree of dispersion in lending rates and heterogeneity in the transmission of monetary policy were salient features of the crisis, this section uses data at both the country and the bank level to explore movements in the level and dispersion of the different funding elements over time. These data contain 
detailed information on quantities of deposits held by the non-financial private 
sector, debt securities issued by banks and capital, as well as prices of deposits and 
securities and an estimate of the cost of equity. 
The cost of deposits across euro area countries can vary for a number of reasons, such as differences in maturity or market structure and variation in credit risk and in institutional factors, including regulation and taxation.33 Despite these differences, the transmission of monetary policy must be smooth 
across euro area countries and banks in the long run. Uncertainty and stress in the financial markets during the crisis meant that credit risk concerns fuelled financial market fragmentation and hindered transmission as dispersion in pricing behaviour across banks increased in relation to the perceived interaction with sovereign credit risk in their country of residence.34Developments in deposit rates have broadly followed monetary policy rates, albeit with an incomplete pass-through. As the interest rate on the ECB™s main 
refinancing operations (MROs) was cut from 4.25% at the end of September 2008 
to 1.00% in May 2009, deposit rates in the euro area also fell, although to a lesser 33 See ﬁDifferences in MFI interest rates across euro area countriesﬂ, ECB, September 2006.
34 See Darracq-Pariès, M., Moccero, D., Krylova, E. and Marchini, C., ﬁThe retail bank interest rate 
 pass-through: the case of the euro area during the financial and sovereign debt crisisﬂ, Occasional Paper Series, No 155, ECB, August 2014.37extent (see Chart 8). In October 2008 they stood at around 2.95%, and reached a trough of around 1.0% at the beginning of 2010. From the middle of 2010, deposit rates started increasing gradually and, following two policy rate increases in the middle of 2011, stood 
at around 1.45% at the end of 2011. Monetary policy 
then resumed an easing cycle, whereby the MRO rate was cut incrementally from 1.50% in November 2011 to 

0.05% in September 2014. Deposit rates fell over this period, and the average composite rate currently stands at around 0.4%. Moreover, the dispersion of deposit 
rates has narrowed somewhat, as they are close to the zero lower bound, particularly for shorter maturities. 
However, the number of banks with negative deposit 
rates for any segment remains small (see Chart 10).Before the crisis deposit rates were lower overall in vulnerable countries than in less vulnerable countries. This is largely explained by the difference in 
the maturity of the deposits (see Chart 9). Particularly in vulnerable countries, overnight deposits made up a significant share of bank deposits from the non-financial sector. Since the crisis, the 

share of overnight deposits has increased in both vulnerable and less vulnerable 
countries against the background of lower interest rates. However, the increase 
in the weight of overnight deposits started later in vulnerable countries, against a background of hampered access to wholesale funding markets. The share of 
long-term deposits has declined somewhat in the euro area as a whole, driven by developments in less vulnerable countries, but it remains considerably higher than in vulnerable countries. Chart 8Composite euro area bank deposit rates for the non-financial private sector(percentages per annum)01234520072009201120132015euro areavulnerable countriesless vulnerable countriesMRO rateSource: ECB.Note: Composite rates are computed as averages of new business rates for different 

maturities, weighted by outstanding amounts.Chart 9Breakdown of non-financial private sector deposits by maturity(EUR billions)01,0002,0003,0004,0005,0006,0007,0008,0009,00020072009201120132015totalovernight depositsother short-term depositslong-term depositsa) Euro area05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,00020072009201120132015b) Vulnerable countries01,0002,0003,0004,0005,0006,0007,00020072009201120132015c) Less vulnerable countriesSource: ECB.38Deposit rates in vulnerable countries did not fully follow policy rate declines at the height of the crisis. The median deposit rate for banks in vulnerable countries fell from 2.86% in September 2008, when policy rates were cut, to around 1.15% in mid-2012 (see Chart 10). In less vulnerable countries, the median deposit interest rate fell further (from 3.58% to 0.88%). In vulnerable countries, deposit outflows and banks™ need to attract more stable funding may have stemmed the decrease 
in rates.35 Since the OMT announcement in the middle of 2012, deposit outflows 
linked to concerns about the health of sovereigns and banks have receded. Deposit rates have fallen and the dispersion in pricing across banks in vulnerable countries has also declined notably, particularly following the announcement of further credit 
easing by the ECB in mid-2014 and the expanded APP in early 2015. Deposit rates 
are increasingly clustered at zero as the effect of monetary easing keeps funding 
costs low. Nonetheless, banks have proved reluctant to set negative deposit rates. 
This is likely to reflect commercial policies, since retail depositors are likely to be less 
averse to an increase in commissions than to a negative deposit rate. It may also reflect the gradual pass-through of past cuts in monetary policy rates to deposit rates and the recent re-pricing in wholesale markets. Banks™ access to market funding deteriorated during the crisis, with 
funding flows diminishing and the cost of issuing debt securities increasing substantially.
 Around the time of the turmoil related to the sub-prime mortgage 
crisis in the United States and the collapse of Lehman Brothers there was a general 
increase in market funding costs in the euro area (see Chart 11). While this increase 
was more significant in vulnerable countries, it was driven by a small number of large banks that were particularly affected by the collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
When the sovereign debt crisis broke out in early 2010, the level and dispersion of 35 See the box entitled ﬁThe impact of the financial crisis on banks™ deposit marginsﬂ, 
Financial Stability Review, ECB, June 2011. Chart 10Distribution of euro area bank deposit rates for the non-financial private sector(percentages per annum)0.00.51.01.52.02.502468Sep. 2015 (median = 0.24)June 2012 (median = 1.15)Sep. 2008 (median = 2.86)a)Vulnerable countriesMROSep. 2015MROSep. 2008MROJune 20120.00.51.01.52.02.502468Sep. 2015 (median = 0.23)June 2012 (median = 0.88)Sep. 2008 (median = 3.58)b) Less vulnerable countriesMROJune 2012MROSep. 2008MROSep. 2015Sources: iBoxx and ECB.Notes: Composite rates are computed as averages of new business rates for different maturities, weighted by outstanding amounts. The chart shows the density approximation of 

the distribution of deposit rates obtained from a sample of MFIs in vulnerable and less vulnerable countries.39market funding costs increased in vulnerable countries, while banks in less vulnerable countries were more insulated from the turmoil. By the middle of 2011, as 
the sovereign debt crisis intensified, market funding costs for banks in both vulnerable and less vulnerable countries had increased, although the gap between them also widened.36 While the introduction at the end of 2011 and in early 2012 of the LTROs with a three-

year maturity acted as a strong backstop to prevent forced deleveraging of banks and helped subdue market funding costs, these remained high overall until the OMT announcement in mid-2012. Bond yields have 
since fallen across both vulnerable and less vulnerable countries. Market funding costs declined further for 
most euro area banks as a result of the expanded APP, at least until the re-pricing in financial markets 
observed in April 2015. Developments in credit default 
swap (CDS) spreads, which abstract from differences 
in the type and maturity of the debt securities issued 
by banks, were broadly in line with bank bond yields. Distributions of five-year CDS spreads show that the sovereign debt crisis led to 
a significant increase in the dispersion of the perceived credit risk of banks, most notably in vulnerable countries (see Chart 12). The ECB™s monetary policy actions 
since the second half of 2012 and the strengthening of the European supervisory, 
regulatory and resolution framework have led to a decline in the stress in financial 36 See Babihuga, R. and Spaltro, M., ﬁBank Funding Costs for International Banksﬂ, 
IMF Working Papers, No 14/71, April 2014.Chart 11
Yields on bonds issued by euro area banks
(percentages per annum)024681020072009201120132015euro areavulnerable countriesless vulnerable countriesSources: iBoxx and ECB.Note: Bank bond yields are averaged by outstanding amount of securities issued.Chart 12Distribution of five-year bank CDS spreads(basis points)0.0000.0050.0100.0150.0200.0250100200300400500600Sep. 2015 (median = 140)June 2012 (median = 500)Sep. 2008 (median = 112)a) Vulnerable countries0.0000.0050.0100.0150.0200.0250100200300400500600Sep. 2015 (median = 81)June 2012 (median = 229)Sep. 2008 (median = 103)b) Less vulnerable countriesSources: Datastream and ECB.
40markets and a decrease in the dispersion of the perceived risk of euro area banks, as well as in their wholesale market funding costs. Nonetheless, renewed tensions in Greece have led to an increase in CDS spreads for some banks since early 2015. The cost of equity for euro area banks rose sharply during the financial crisis (see Chart 13). This was 
triggered by the sub-prime mortgage crisis in the 
United States. A gap between the expected return paid 
by banks in vulnerable and less vulnerable countries 
started to open up after the outbreak of the euro area sovereign crisis in 2010. Until the summer of 2007 euro area banks had been able to raise equity at an expected rate of return of approximately 7%. Between the beginning of the US subprime crisis and the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers, their cost of equity rose to almost 10%. It continued to increase until the second half of 2012, when it reached a level well above 10%. Eventually, the introduction of the three-year LTROs 
and the OMT announcement began to moderate risk aversion in financial markets. At 

the same time, risk-free rates decreased and banks undertook a steady process of deleveraging that resulted in a reduction of their market risk. As a result, even though 

the equity premium has remained a few percentage points higher than before the crisis, lower risk-free rates and lower balance sheet risks have brought the cost of bank equity back down to levels close to those prevailing before the crisis (see Box 1 for details of the cost of equity estimation). However, the gap between banks™ equity 
funding costs in vulnerable and less vulnerable countries has not closed and has reached spreads of approximately 2 percentage points.Overall, Eurosystem support played a major role during the crisis in mitigating distortions related to dysfunctional funding markets by providing abundant liquidity at low interest rates and minimising the pro-cyclical contraction in 
lending to the non-financial private sector. 
Chart 14 provides a simple illustration of the direct impact of Eurosystem liquidity on banks™ funding costs. Against the 
background of the ECB™s forward guidance and fixed rate full allotment policy, banks 
were able to use liquidity provided by the central bank for refinancing in place of wholesale market debt in a context of adverse market conditions. This effect can 

be illustrated by assuming that in the absence of Eurosystem liquidity banks would have issued debt securities at the cost implied by the secondary market, leading to a higher weighted average cost of debt funding. This measure shows considerable 
dispersion across banks and particularly high cost relief for banks located in vulnerable countries. For banks in less vulnerable countries, the cost relief provided by Eurosystem liquidity was smaller, even though it increased for a minority of banks 
following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and then more modestly at the peak of 
the sovereign debt crisis. This indicator is likely to underestimate the actual impact 
of Eurosystem liquidity, since it abstracts from the relief from quantitative constraints 
Chart 13Cost of euro area bank equity(percentages per annum)46810121420072009201120132015euro areavulnerable countriesless vulnerable countriesSources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream, Consensus Economics and ECB 
calculations.41and from the positive effect of the operations on the price of other funding sources 
due to improved market sentiment. On the other hand, it could also be the case that relatively profitable opportunities emerged, given the 
access to liquidity at a very low cost, which would mean that if the liquidity had not been available, banks would have simply forgone those opportunities and not issued debt.All three main transmission channels of the APP 
and the TLT
ROs Œ the direct pass-through, portfolio rebalancing and signalling channels Œ have an 
impact on bank funding costs and, ultimately, 
output and inflation.37 There are a number of ways to 
estimate the direct and indirect impact of the APP and 

the TLTROs on banks™ funding conditions, one of which 
is using controlled event studies. Such studies suggest that the combined effects of the non-standard monetary 
policy measures implemented since June 2014 have significantly lowered yields in a broad set of financial market segments, with the effects generally increasing 

with maturity and riskiness (see Chart 15).3837 For a more detailed discussion of the different channels, see Borio, C. and Disyatat, P., 
ﬁUnconventional monetary policies: an appraisalﬂ, BIS Working Papers, No 292, November 2009. 38 See Altavilla, C., Carboni, G. and Motto, R., ﬁAsset purchase programmes and financial markets: 

lessons from the euro areaﬂ, Working Paper Series, No 1864, ECB, November 2015. Chart 14Interaction between Eurosystem liquidity and banks™ average cost of debt financing
(percentages per annum)-1012345620072009201120132015Less vulnerable countries-1012345620072009201120132015totalmedian10th-90th percentileVulnerable countriesSources: iBoxx, ECB and ECB calculations.Note: The shaded area shows the distribution between the 10th and 90th percentiles. The indicator is calculated by attributing the cost of debt securities to the share of Eurosystem 
liquidity in banks™ funding structures. On this basis, a hypothetical weighted average cost of debt funding is obtained and compared with that which was actually observed. The 

Chart 15Estimated impact of the TLTROs and APP on bank 
bond yields(basis points)020406080TLTROsAPPeuro areaminimum/maximum for the four largest euro area countriesSource: ECB calculations.424 Conclusions
Changes in the composition and cost of bank funding and capital have important implications for credit provision and, consequently, for output and 
inflation. Banks™ funding costs are affected by monetary policy, but the transmission 
of monetary policy depends on many factors, including the strength of banks™ 

balance sheets and the macroeconomic environment.Over the crisis, funding conditions fluctuated greatly, owing to changes in 
the economic environment, financial and sovereign market tensions and the monetary policy response to these developments. Bank funding structures changed considerably, in part reflecting the need to increase the weight of capital 
in the overall funding mix and reduce the overreliance on wholesale funding that 
was observed in the run-up to the crisis. The ECB™s standard and non-standard 
monetary policy measures provided considerable support to the economy over the different phases of the crisis. The Governing Council decreased the interest rate on 
refinancing operations and increased the quantity and maturity of liquidity provided to banks, which helped prevent disorderly deleveraging and mitigate the stress 
in funding markets. Steps towards a banking union and a more comprehensive regulatory environment have also encouraged a move towards a more sustainable and resilient funding structure. More recently, as the banking system has stabilised, 
policies have been introduced to address below-target inflation. The credit easing 
package introduced in the middle of 2014 and the APP provide additional liquidity 
and reduce funding costs, supporting banks™ intermediation capacity and, ultimately, 
output and inflation. While monetary policy measures have helped to reduce the heterogeneity in euro area funding conditions (particularly for deposits and bonds, leading to 
improved policy transmission), there remain differences across countries, as seen in the cost of equity. 
The differences in the cost of equity across countries 
reflect remaining differences in perceived risk, as well as underlying differences in 
strength of banks™ balance sheets and expected profitability. Many of the problems 
for banks are related to structural issues that are outside the realm of monetary policy and require action from the private sector or governments to ensure a sustained recovery. 
Current monetary policy measures and a changing regulatory environment will continue to affect the composition and cost of bank funding. Steps towards banking union and important regulatory initiatives at the global and European level will strengthen banks, which will have a considerable impact on their funding structure. While the adjustment to this new environment may carry costs in the short term, the reduction in the risk of further systemic crises will lead to a more stable banking system and robust transmission mechanism. 43Box 1Estimation of the cost of equity This box outlines the approach used to estimate the cost of equity (COE) of euro area banks. Estimates are based on an application of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM). This approach 
can be applied to a portfolio of the largest listed euro area banks.The COE is the rate of return that shareholders expect to earn (in equilibrium) on a stake in the equity of a bank or a portfolio of banks. The value of an investment should amount to the 
expected sum of all its future cash flows, discounted at a rate that compensates for the investment risk: this discount rate is defined as the COE of that investment.39 As the COE is unobservable, it 
must be inferred from prices and expected cash flows using a theoretical model. There are two methods of estimating banks™ C
OE: a direct and an indirect one.40 Direct estimates invert the discounted cash flow formula to compute the COE, given the market price of equity and the (survey-based) market expectations of banks™ future cash flows. As the market 
price must (in equilibrium) coincide with the discounted sum of all expected future cash flows, the 
valuation formula can be solved for the discount rate that prices the banks™ equity. This is also called 
the implied equity premium approach. Indirect estimates, on the other hand, first infer an implied COE for the whole stock market and then project it onto banks™ COE with an economic model. As 
with direct estimates, the first step is calculated using the implied equity premium approach, while the CAPM operationalises the second stage. The difference between the expected return on the 

stock market and the risk-free rate is known as the market equity premium, a measure of the market 
price of risk that is used to price all assets under the CAPM.The methodology used in this box relies on the indirect method and is based on two elements: an estimate of the market equity premium and its projection onto banks™ C
OE 
obtained using the CAPM. The CAPM is a general equilibrium model that imposes tight 
restrictions on the cross section of expected returns. It predicts that the expected excess return on 
asset over the risk-free rate (E[Ri ] Œ Rrfi for any i:(E[Ri ] Œ Rrfi (E[Rm ] Œ Rrf) where (E[Rm ] Œ Rrfi = [cov(Ri,Rm)/var(Rm )] measures the contribution of asset i to the risk of the market portfolio (quantity of risk). Given the 
i is sufficient to price asset i.
The reference market portfolio here is the euro area stock market. This is approximated by the 
Euro STOXX portfolio, a broad yet liquid subset of the STOXX Europe 600 portfolio. Returns on 
39 More generally, the COE can be defined for a single project or a portfolio Œ a firm (portfolio of projects), 
a sector (portfolio of firms) or the whole stock market (portfolio of all firms).40 This box does not explicitly consider surveys in which financial sector participants only report 

their estimated COE and/or historical averages of realised excess returns as a proxy for the COE. 
The former are excluded as they are crude numbers which do not lend themselves to economic 
interpretation, and the latter are excluded as they are generated by a naive model. 44the portfolio of 33 Euro STOXX banks are aggregated using daily market capitalisation as weights. 
These banks account for roughly 85% of the total assets and total market capitalisation of all listed euro area banks.41The quantity of risk carried by bank shares (i.e. banks™ beta) is estimated using standard 
linear regression techniques.42 Returns of each portfolio are regressed on the returns of the market index. The reference market index for all securities is the Euro STOXX index because the 
euro area is a well-integrated financial market with low cross-border transaction costs and a single currency. In order to document the development of the industry™s COE over time, the analysis 
concentrates on spot estimates of beta, obtained with rolling regressions of daily data over short windows (one year).43 Euro area banks™ beta was fairly stable (between 1.0 and 1.2) until the first 
half of 2007. Following the outbreak of the financial crisis, it increased constantly until it reached  1.7 in the second half of 2012. After this peak, there was a sharp decline, back to pre-crisis levels.
The equity premium is estimated using the market price of equity and analysts™ expectations 
of future dividends. Implied premia are forward-looking measures, calculated using a variant of the discounted cash flow model (DCFM). Assuming a constant dividend pay-out ratio, which implies 
an equal growth rate of earnings and dividends, the DCFM reduces to the dividend discount model (DDM). In its simplest form, the DDM posits that the value of equity is determined by the flow of dividends that it yields to investors, discounted at a rate that accounts for a term premium and an equity risk premium.44 The basic, constant growth DDM can be represented as follows:
Pt = Et k=0 where Dt+k is the level of dividends in period t + k and pt+k is the discount rate from t to t + k, defined as the sum of the risk-free rate and the equity premium:Pt+k = 1 + R    + EPtAssuming that dividends grow at a constant rate g , the two equations imply that
EPt =       (1 + g) Œ (Rrf Œ g) 41 For reasons of data quality and availability, the countries defined in this article as vulnerable and 
less vulnerable are represented in this box by the following countries: Spain and Italy for vulnerable 
countries and Belgium, Germany, France and Austria for less vulnerable countries. 42 As in Fama, E.F. and MacBeth, J.D., ﬁRisk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Testsﬂ, 
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No 3, 1973, pp. 607-636. 43 For the sake of robustness, the estimates are compared with those obtained from five-year rolling 

windows of monthly data. The difference is not statistically significant, except for the recent period. The 
departure of the two measures from one another in the last period is a sign of the ongoing deleveraging 
of European banks. 44 See Gordon, M. J., ﬁDividends, Earnings, and Stock Pricesﬂ, 
Review of Economics and Statistics,  Vol. 41, No 2, 1959, pp. 99-105. Dt+kt+krft+kDttDttt45The equity premium is estimated using a variation of the DDM known as the H-model. 45 Dividends are expected to grow at an abnormal rate for ga (an average of) H years and gradually decelerate/accelerate to a normal growth rate gss in the long run. The expected growth rate is 
assumed to decline linearly from an initial rate ga to the long-term (constant) rate gss:EPt =       (1 + ga) + H * (ga Œ gss) Œ (Rrf Œ gss) The long-term expected growth rate gss, is obtained from the forecast survey of Consensus Economics, as the long-term real GDP growth forecast (beyond five years ahead). Long-term real 
interest rates are yields to maturity on ten-year inflation-linked sovereign bonds. Dividend yields  Dt / Pt and abnormal growth rate forecasts ga are obtained from the Institutional Brokers Estimate 
System (I/B/E/S) database. This database measures a weighted (by market capitalisation) average 

of the median forecast of the annual growth rate of earnings for individual firms included in the Euro STOXX index over a five-year period. 
45 As in Fuller, R.J. and Hsia, C.-C., ﬁA Simplified Common Stock Valuation Modelﬂ, 
Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 40, No 5, 1984, pp. 49-56. DtttS 1StatisticsS 1ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - StatisticsContents 1 External environment
S 2 2 Financial developments
S 3 3 Economic activity
S 8 4 Prices and costs
S 14 5 Money and credit
S 18 6 Fiscal developments
S 23Further information ECB statistics can be accessed from the Statistical Data Warehouse (SDW): 
http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/ Data from the statistics section of the Economic Bulletin are available from the SDW: http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node
=1000004813 A comprehensive Statistics Bulletin can be found in the SDW: 
http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?node=1000004045  Methodological definitions can be found in the General Notes to the Statistics Bulletin:http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?no
de=10000023 Details on calculations can be found in the Technical Notes to the Statistics Bulletin:http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/reports.do?nod
e=10000022
html/glossa.en.htmlConventions used in the tables   
  -data do not exist/data are not applicable 

   
 .data are not yet available
   
 ...nil or negligible

   

 (p)provisional
   
 s.a.seasonally adjusted

   

 n.s.a.non-seasonally adjusted
S 21 External environmentS 2ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics1.1 Main trading partners, GDP and CPI         GDP 1)    CPI   (period-on-period percentage changes)   (annual percentage changes)G20UnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:   OECD countriesUnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:
StatesKingdom
euro areaStatesKingdom
euro area 2)Totalexcluding food
(HICP)(HICP)and energy12345
67
89101112
1320133.11.52.21.47.7-0.31.6
1.61.52.60.42.6
1.420143.32.42.9-0.17.4
0.91.7
1.81.61.52.72.0
0.42015. . . . . . . . 0.10.0. 1.4
0.02015 Q1 0.80.20.41.11.3
0.50.6
1.7-0.10.12.31.2
-0.3         Q2 0.71.00.5-0.11.8
0.40.5
1.60.00.00.51.4
0.2         Q3 0.70.50.40.31.8
0.30.5
1.70.10.00.21.7
0.1         Q4 . . . . . . . . 0.50.1. 1.5
0.22015 July - - - - - - 0.6
1.70.20.10.31.6
0.2         Aug. - - - - - - 0.6
1.70.20.00.22.0
0.1         Sep. - - - - - - 0.4
1.80.0-0.10.01.6
-0.1         Oct. - - - - - - 0.6
1.80.2-0.10.31.3
0.1         Nov. - - - - - - 0.7
1.80.50.10.31.5
0.1         Dec. - - - - - - . 
. 0.70.2. 1.6
0.2Sources: Eurostat (col. 3, 6, 10, 13); BIS (col. 2, 4, 9, 11, 12); OECD (col. 1, 5, 7, 8).1) Quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted.
2) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.               imports 1) 2)    Global 2)UnitedUnitedJapanChinaMemo item:ManufacturingServicesNew exportGlobalAdvancedEmerging
StatesKingdom
euro areaorderseconomiesmarket
economies12345
678
910
1112
201353.354.856.852.651.549.7
52.352.750.73.1-0.15.4
201454.257.357.950.951.152.7
53.454.151.53.23.62.8
201553.355.856.351.450.453.8
52.053.950.4. . . 
2015 Q1 53.956.957.350.451.553.3
52.854.350.3-2.01.4-4.4
         Q2 53.455.957.251.351.153.9
50.954.249.3-1.0-0.7-1.2
         Q3 53.155.455.151.949.053.9
50.354.048.72.61.23.6
         Q4 52.855.055.552.349.954.1
51.153.350.1. . . 
2015 July 53.455.756.751.550.253.9
50.954.249.10.2-1.21.2
         Aug. 53.555.755.252.948.854.3
50.054.648.82.60.04.6
         Sep. 52.455.053.351.248.053.6
50.153.248.12.61.23.6
         Oct. 52.855.055.452.349.953.9
51.153.350.51.92.11.8
         Nov. 53.356.155.752.350.554.2
51.653.850.2. . . 
         Dec. 52.454.055.352.249.454.3
50.752.949.6. . . 
Sources: Markit (col. 1-9); CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis and ECB calculations (col. 10-12).
1) Global and advanced economies exclude the euro area. Annual and quarterly data are period-on-period percentages; monthly data are 3-month-on-3-month percentages. All dataare seasonally adjusted.2) Excluding the euro area.S 32 Financial developmentsS 3ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics2.1 Money market interest rates(percentages per annum; period averages)   Euro area 1) United StatesJapanOvernight1-month3-month6-month12-month3-month3-monthdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdepositsdeposits(EONIA)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)(EURIBOR)
(LIBOR)(LIBOR)1234567
20130.090.130.220.340.540.270.1520140.090.130.210.310.480.230.132015-0.11-0.07-0.020.050.170.310.092015 June -0.12-0.06-0.010.050.160.280.10         July -0.12-0.07-0.020.050.170.290.10         Aug. -0.12-0.09-0.030.040.160.320.09         Sep. -0.14-0.11-0.040.040.150.330.08         Oct. -0.14-0.12-0.050.020.130.320.08         Nov. -0.13-0.14-0.09-0.020.080.370.08         Dec. -0.20-0.19-0.13-0.040.060.530.08Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area, see the General Notes.2.2 Yield curves(End of period; rates in percentages per annum; spreads in percentage points)            Spot rates   Spreads   Instantaneous forward rates   Euro area 1), 2) Euro area 1), 2)United StatesUnited Kingdom
   Euro area 1), 2)3 months1 year2 years5 years10 years10 years10 years10 years1 year2 years5 years10 years
- 1 year- 1 year- 1 year
12345
6789101112
20130.080.090.251.072.242.152.91
2.660.180.672.533.88
2014-0.02-0.09-0.120.070.650.741.95
1.45-0.15-0.110.581.77
2015-0.45-0.40-0.350.020.771.171.66
1.68-0.35-0.220.821.98
2015 June -0.27-0.26-0.230.190.951.212.09
1.52-0.25-0.101.082.09
         July -0.27-0.29-0.260.080.731.021.87
1.35-0.29-0.130.761.84
         Aug. -0.25-0.27-0.220.140.821.091.84
1.46-0.25-0.070.861.97
         Sep. -0.36-0.27-0.240.040.700.971.73
1.24-0.22-0.170.731.76
         Oct. -0.35-0.33-0.31-0.030.630.961.82
1.40-0.32-0.250.661.69
         Nov. -0.41-0.40-0.40-0.130.580.981.73
1.34-0.41-0.360.581.77
         Dec. -0.45-0.40-0.350.020.771.171.66
1.68-0.35-0.220.821.98
Source: ECB.
1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area, see the General Notes.
2) ECB calculations based on underlying data provided by EuroMTS and ratings provided by Fitch Ratings.2.3 Stock market indices(index levels in points; period averages)   Dow Jones EURO STOXX indicesUnitedJapan
      States   Benchmark   Main industry indicesBroad50BasicConsumerConsumerOil andFinancialsIndustrialsTechnologyUtilitiesTelecomsHealth careStandardNikkei


5001234567891011121314
2013281.92,794.0586.3195.0468.2312.8151.5402.7274.1230.6253.4629.41,643.813,577.9
2014318.73,145.3644.3216.6510.6335.5180.0452.9310.8279.2306.7668.11,931.415,460.4
2015356.23,444.1717.4261.9628.2299.9189.8500.6373.2278.0377.7821.32,061.119,203.8
2015 June 364.03,521.8743.2265.5647.4310.3194.5504.7385.0283.0380.7820.42,099.320,403.8
         July 366.33,545.1744.0266.0645.2302.1198.0505.5378.1281.3395.1864.82,094.120,372.6
         Aug. 356.73,444.4711.9261.9615.0287.7193.9504.6359.9274.9390.0856.92,039.919,919.1
         Sep. 330.93,165.5649.6250.9566.4267.2178.5469.7339.5250.8362.6817.41,944.417,944.2
         Oct. 342.23,275.5658.6261.3598.9290.0183.4478.7360.4263.5362.3823.92,024.818,374.1
         Nov. 358.23,439.6703.0269.0640.1297.3187.0507.4394.1270.3385.3850.12,080.619,581.8
         Dec. 346.03,288.6652.5262.8630.2278.1180.2494.9391.7263.6363.3811.02,054.119,202.6
Source: ECB.S 42 Financial developmentsS 4ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics2.4 MFI interest rates on loans to and deposits from households (new business) 1), 2)(Percentages per annum; period average, unless otherwise indicated)            DepositsRevolvingExtended   Loans for consumptionLoans
   Loans for house purchase   loanscredit   
to sole   Over-Redeem-   Withandcard
   By initial periodAPRC
 3)proprietors   By initial periodAPRC
 3)Compositenightable   an agreedoverdraftscredit   of rate fixation
and   of rate fixation
cost-of-at   maturity of:
unincor-borrowingnoticeFloatingOver
poratedFloatingOver 1Over 5Over
indicatorof upUp toOver
rate and1
partner-rate andand upand up10
to 322
up toyear
shipsup toto 5to 10years
monthsyearsyears
1 year1 yearyearsyears
12345678910111213141516
2014 Dec. 0.200.890.961.567.1417.105.076.216.532.742.402.512.502.672.752.48
2015 Jan. 0.190.861.011.957.1817.125.246.426.732.752.312.552.452.432.692.40
         Feb. 0.180.850.971.537.1317.055.186.476.822.792.092.512.352.482.582.37
         Mar. 0.170.830.891.247.1317.055.166.176.502.722.102.452.242.392.532.29
         Apr. 0.160.790.871.197.0317.014.896.136.422.662.012.382.172.362.492.23
         May 0.160.820.841.136.9817.085.046.296.602.672.052.332.102.302.452.17
         June 0.150.780.771.116.9717.024.886.156.472.592.022.252.122.322.482.18
         July 0.150.740.671.146.8317.085.106.206.532.612.052.252.212.362.562.22
         Aug. 0.140.670.671.006.8317.035.306.286.622.602.122.352.302.332.602.26
         Sep. 0.140.670.671.086.8517.065.216.186.552.682.072.362.292.392.612.25
         Oct. 0.140.660.650.996.7116.985.226.036.432.642.062.322.302.412.582.26
         Nov. (p)0.140.650.640.946.6816.915.276.226.602.682.052.322.322.452.622.27
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Including non-profit institutions serving households.3) Annual percentage rate of charge (APRC).2.5 MFI interest rates on loans to and deposits from non-financial corporations (new business) 1), 2)(Percentages per annum; period average, unless otherwise indicated)         DepositsRevolving
   Other loans by size and initial period of rate fixationComposite   loans and
         cost-of-Over-   With an agreedoverdrafts   up to EUR 0.25 million   over EUR 0.25 and up to 1 million   over EUR 1 millionborrowing
night   maturity of:
indicatorFloatingOverOverFloatingOverOverFloatingOverOver
Up toOver
rate3 months1 yearrate3 months1 yearrate3 months1 year
2 years2 years
and up toand up to
and up toand up toand up toand up to
3 months1 year
3 months1 year
3 months1 year
1234567
891011121314
2014 Dec. 0.230.431.253.493.683.753.242.342.772.501.732.162.132.44
2015 Jan. 0.220.441.193.493.783.852.992.312.822.051.662.032.202.44
         Feb. 0.210.351.043.433.593.723.142.232.712.391.511.992.152.36
         Mar. 0.210.320.973.393.453.653.102.162.652.321.612.112.002.35
         Apr. 0.190.300.893.343.463.582.972.182.602.261.611.932.032.32
         May 0.180.300.913.283.373.512.972.152.462.231.561.852.042.26
         June 0.180.311.093.253.193.482.872.092.332.231.591.912.042.24
         July 0.170.320.863.193.273.602.872.072.362.201.501.732.052.17
         Aug. 0.170.240.923.163.243.572.912.072.322.221.391.532.032.13
         Sep. 0.170.260.983.203.233.522.892.032.252.211.491.872.182.20
         Oct. 0.160.260.803.093.183.422.892.042.272.201.431.692.032.14
         Nov. (p)0.160.230.843.053.133.392.882.022.162.201.431.621.982.12
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector.S 52 Financial developmentsS 5ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics2.6 Debt securities issued by euro area residents, by sector of the issuer and initial maturity(EUR billions; transactions during the month and end-of-period outstanding amounts; nominal values)Short-term         Outstanding amounts   Gross issues 1)            TotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General governmentTotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General government
(including   
(including   
Euro-Financial
Non-CentralOther
Euro-Financial
Non-CentralOther
system)corporations
financialgovern-generalsystem)corporations
financialgovern-general
other thanFVCscorporationsmentgovern-
other thanFVCscorporationsmentgovern-
MFIsmentMFIsment12
34
56789
1011121314
20121,432587146.7555866703491
37.5210321
20131,253483122.6752953508314
30.449921
20141,320544129.5953850409219
33.399325
2015 June 1,336559130.7551756296123
30.347732
         July 1,339558126.8152054339143
34.399131
         Aug. 1,340558130.7951559290132
28.227929
         Sep. 1,324545125.7552059343162
30.299330
         Oct. 1,337552143.7450960362172
31.328642
         Nov. 1,351559144.7350966311140
39.307526
Long-term201215,2054,8143,166.8425,75862425598
45.168412
201315,1084,4053,086.9216,06962722270
39.16899
201415,1264,0483,158.9936,28564322166
44.168510
2015 June 15,3413,9373,258.1,0276,48463420869
34.13875
         July 15,3013,9153,278.1,0346,43763622479
42.108310
         Aug. 15,2433,8923,236.1,0336,44463711242
19.
4444
         Sep. 15,2633,8643,244.1,0406,48263325563
80.14934
         Oct. 15,3493,8593,312.1,0476,49563623480
43.128910
         Nov. 15,4113,8703,311.1,0626,52464420170
38.156711
Source: ECB.1) For the purpose of comparison, annual data refer to the average monthly figure over the year.2.7 Growth rates and outstanding amounts of debt securities and listed shares(EUR billions; percentage changes)Oustanding amount         Debt securities   Listed shares      TotalMFIs   Non-MFI corporations   General governmentTotalMFIsFinancialNon-
(including   
corporationsfinancial
Eurosystem)Financial
Non-CentralOther
other thancorporations
corporationsfinancialgovernmentgeneral
MFIsother thanFVCscorporations
governmentMFIs1234
56789
1011
201216,636.65,400.93,312.0.917.36,316.2690.34,598.5404.7616.03,577.9
201316,361.54,887.63,208.5.987.96,597.8679.65,649.0569.1748.74,331.3
201416,446.24,591.63,287.1.1,051.66,822.9692.95,958.0591.1786.64,580.3
2015 June 16,676.64,496.03,387.7.1,101.97,000.6690.56,843.6664.3881.35,298.0
         July 16,639.24,472.93,404.1.1,115.36,956.9690.07,114.5695.0915.65,503.9
         Aug. 16,583.44,450.23,365.3.1,112.26,959.6696.16,576.7630.6850.75,095.3
         Sep. 16,587.34,409.53,368.9.1,114.87,001.9692.16,273.7582.5807.24,884.0
         Oct. 16,686.24,411.03,454.3.1,120.57,004.1696.36,812.0612.1874.75,325.2
         Nov. 16,762.04,429.63,454.9.1,135.07,032.2710.27,006.4613.9922.65,469.9
Growth rate20121.3-1.8-0.3.14.42.56.10.84.92.00.3
2013-1.4-8.9-3.4.8.04.5-1.10.77.2-0.40.2
2014-0.7-7.80.4.4.93.11.21.47.21.00.7
2015 June -1.1-7.71.3.4.21.6-0.71.04.10.50.7
         July -1.2-7.60.5.3.91.5-0.51.03.30.30.9
         Aug. -1.0-7.30.5.3.91.8-0.11.03.30.40.8
         Sep. -0.5-7.52.3.4.12.4-1.81.03.30.50.7
         Oct. 0.2-6.03.0.4.12.40.21.03.30.90.8
         Nov. 0.2-5.62.6.4.42.21.31.03.01.50.6
Source: ECB.S 62 Financial developmentsS 6ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics2.8 Effective exchange rates 1)(period averages; index: 1999 Q1=100)         EER-19   EER-38NominalReal CPIReal PPIReal GDPReal ULCM
 2)Real ULCTNominalReal CPI
deflator12345678
2013101.298.296.791.1102.098.8
111.995.6
2014101.897.996.791.3102.2100.4
114.796.1
201592.488.489.1. . . 106.587.9
2015 Q1 93.089.189.483.991.392.2
106.488.3
         Q2 91.287.588.382.390.090.1
104.486.3
         Q3 92.788.789.684.091.691.4
107.688.7
         Q4 92.488.389.3...107.788.4
2015 July 91.387.588.3- - - 105.186.7
         Aug. 93.089.089.8- - - 108.189.1
         Sep. 93.889.790.7- - - 109.690.3
         Oct. 93.689.590.4- - - 109.089.6
         Nov. 91.187.088.0- - - 106.086.9
         Dec. 92.588.389.4- - - 108.088.5
Percentage change versus previous month2015 Dec. 1.51.41.5- - - 1.9
1.9Percentage change versus previous year2015 Dec. -6.6-6.9-5.2- - - -4.5
-5.7Source: ECB.1) For a definition of the trading partner groups and other information see the General Notes to the Statistics Bulletin.
2) ULCM-deflated series are available only for the EER-18 trading partner group.2.9 Bilateral exchange rates(period averages; units of national currency per euro)ChineseCroatianCzechDanishHungarianJapanesePolishPoundRomanianSwedishSwissUS
renminbikunakorunakroneforintyenzlotysterlingleukronafrancDollar
123456789101112
20138.1657.57925.9807.458296.873129.6634.1970.8494.41908.6521.2311.328
20148.1867.63427.5367.455308.706140.3064.1840.8064.44379.0991.2151.329
20156.9737.61427.2797.459309.996134.3144.1840.7264.44549.3531.0681.110
2015 Q1 7.0237.68127.6247.450308.889134.1214.1930.7434.45169.3801.0721.126
         Q2 6.8577.57427.3797.462306.100134.2894.0880.7214.44429.3001.0411.105
         Q3 7.0087.57827.0757.462312.095135.8634.1880.7174.42909.4291.0721.112
         Q4 7.0007.62327.0577.460312.652132.9524.2640.7224.45739.3021.0851.095
2015 July 6.8277.58627.0947.462311.531135.6814.1520.7074.43919.3861.0491.100
         Aug. 7.0637.55827.0417.463311.614137.1244.1950.7144.42359.5151.0781.114
         Sep. 7.1467.58927.0897.461313.145134.8514.2180.7314.42369.3921.0911.122
         Oct. 7.1357.62127.1057.460311.272134.8394.2510.7334.42279.3491.0881.124
         Nov. 6.8407.60727.0397.460312.269131.5974.2490.7074.44539.3131.0831.074
         Dec. 7.0197.64027.0277.461314.398132.3584.2900.7264.50339.2451.0831.088
Percentage change versus previous month2015 Dec. 2.60.40.00.00.70.61.02.71.3-0.7-0.11.3
Percentage change versus previous year2015 Dec. -8.0-0.4-2.20.31.1-10.01.8-7.91.0-1.7-10.0-11.8
Source: ECB.S 72 Financial developmentsS 7ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics2.10 Euro area balance of payments, financial account(EUR billions, unless otherwise indicated; outstanding amounts at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts (international investment position)               Total 1)    Direct   PortfolioNet   Other investmentReserveMemo:
      investment   investmentfinancial   
assetsGross
derivativesexternalAssetsLiabilitiesNetAssetsLiabilitiesAssetsLiabilities
AssetsLiabilities
debt123456789101112
2014 Q4 19,874.620,995.4-1,120.78,247.86,403.16,467.39,829.8-43.14,590.44,762.5612.312,048.4
2015 Q1 21,841.722,847.8-1,006.08,952.86,632.87,225.211,059.5-69.35,042.75,155.5690.413,008.1
         Q2 21,447.022,295.7-848.78,871.76,704.27,105.710,628.1-24.84,835.94,963.4658.512,653.2
         Q3 21,347.022,222.1-875.19,177.37,153.76,781.010,124.9-36.74,781.14,943.4644.212,668.6
Outstanding amounts as a percentage of GDP2015 Q3 206.9215.4-8.588.969.365.798.1-0.446.347.96.2122.8
Transactions2014 Q4 83.320.662.765.670.4103.512.310.0-98.8-62.12.9-
2015 Q1 547.1511.735.5193.789.2137.1249.922.6187.9172.55.8-
         Q2 60.923.037.997.0139.7128.21.51.3-163.3-118.3-2.4-
         Q3 59.013.945.1106.4137.814.2-106.9-1.7-62.6-16.92.7-
2015 June -57.1-116.759.636.157.034.5-22.4-6.4-124.5-151.33.2-
         July 120.0130.9-10.882.795.414.9-63.69.919.599.1-7.0-
         Aug. -18.4-25.36.9-10.04.3-12.1-34.3-7.810.14.71.4-
         Sep. -42.6-91.649.033.838.111.4-9.0-3.8-92.2-120.78.3-
         Oct. 121.184.736.440.542.655.830.3-0.731.411.7-6.0-
         Nov. -15.6-52.737.2-3.4-5.234.8-8.713.7-63.0-38.92.5-
12-month cumulated transactions2015 Nov. 649.3499.4149.9426.5406.8392.1168.237.5-210.4-75.63.7-
12-month cumulated transactions as a percentage of GDP2015 Nov. 6.34.81.54.13.93.81.60.4-2.0-0.70.0-
Source: ECB.1) Net financial derivatives are included in total assets.S 83 Economic activityS 8ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics3.1 GDP and expenditure components(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Current prices (EUR billions)   GDP      Total   Domestic demand   External balance 1)TotalPrivateGovernment   Gross fixed capital formation
Changes inTotalExports
 1)Imports 1)consumptionconsumption
inventories 2)TotalTotalIntellectual
constructionmachineryproperty
products12
345
67
89101112
20129,835.29,573.95,533.72,065.51,992.21,035.3589.2362.9
-17.5261.34,299.24,037.9
20139,933.59,595.35,557.22,094.51,949.91,005.5573.7365.7
-6.2338.24,374.54,036.2
201410,108.19,732.55,627.82,131.31,984.71,008.1596.2375.3
-11.3375.64,522.54,146.8
2014 Q4 2,549.62,444.71,417.6535.6501.2252.2152.794.9
-9.6104.91,155.01,050.0
2015 Q1 2,571.92,460.41,420.1539.3508.4256.0154.596.7
-7.4111.51,166.91,055.4
         Q2 2,591.02,470.61,432.6542.4509.7253.8155.199.5
-14.2120.51,194.81,074.4
         Q3 2,606.82,487.71,437.6546.5510.9253.6154.7101.2
-7.4119.01,192.11,073.1
as a percentage of GDP2014100.096.355.721.119.710.05.93.7
-0.13.7- - 
Chain-linked volumes (prices for the previous year)quarter-on-quarter percentage changes2014 Q4 0.40.30.50.20.60.20.71.4
- - 1.21.2
2015 Q1 0.50.70.50.51.51.31.91.4
- - 1.31.9
         Q2 0.40.00.30.30.1-0.90.12.6
- - 1.60.9
         Q3 0.30.60.40.60.0-0.2-0.51.2
- - 0.20.9
annual percentage changes2012-0.9-2.4-1.2-0.2-3.3-4.0-4.72.0
- - 2.6-1.0
2013-0.3-0.7-0.70.2-2.6-3.4-2.2-0.3
- - 2.11.3
20140.90.90.80.91.3-0.54.12.0
- - 4.14.5
2014 Q4 0.91.01.21.00.9-0.72.72.3
- - 4.75.0
2015 Q1 1.31.31.61.32.00.14.82.6
- - 5.25.8
         Q2 1.61.31.71.32.60.64.45.0
- - 5.85.5
         Q3 1.61.71.71.62.20.52.26.8
- - 4.44.9
contributions to quarter-on-quarter percentage changes in GDP; percentage points2014 Q4 0.40.30.30.00.10.00.00.1
-0.10.0- - 
2015 Q1 0.50.70.30.10.30.10.10.1
0.1-0.2- - 
         Q2 0.40.00.20.10.0-0.10.00.1
-0.20.4- - 
         Q3 0.30.60.20.10.00.00.00.0
0.2-0.3- - 
contributions to annual percentage changes in GDP; percentage points2012-0.9-2.4-0.7-0.1-0.7-1.8-1.20.3
-0.91.5- - 
2013-0.3-0.7-0.40.0-0.5-1.4-0.50.0
0.20.4- - 
20140.90.90.40.20.3-0.20.90.3
0.00.0- - 
2014 Q4 0.90.90.60.20.2-0.10.20.1
-0.10.0- - 
2015 Q1 1.31.30.90.30.40.00.30.1
-0.30.0- - 
         Q2 1.61.21.00.30.50.10.30.2
-0.50.4- - 
         Q3 1.61.61.00.30.40.00.10.3
-0.1-0.1- - 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Exports and imports cover goods and services and include cross-border intra-euro area trade.
2) Including acquisitions less disposals of valuables.S 93 Economic activityS 9ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics3.2 Value added by economic activity(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Current prices (EUR billions)   Gross value added (basic prices)Taxes lesssubsidiesTotalAgriculture,ManufacturingConst-Trade,Infor-FinanceRealProfessional,Public ad-Arts, enter-on
forestry andenergy andructiontransport,mationandestatebusiness andministration,tainmentproducts
fishingutilities
accom-and com-insurance
supporteducation,and other
modationmunica-
serviceshealth andservices
and foodtion
social workservices12345678
9101112
20128,842.1148.81,730.7468.81,667.2411.4442.11,013.6928.21,718.5312.8993.1
20138,929.0152.31,736.3457.91,682.1412.5442.21,032.3945.11,751.3317.01,004.5
20149,074.4146.91,756.5461.01,711.8417.6455.61,051.6967.71,782.2323.61,033.7
2014 Q4 2,287.035.5442.8115.6432.7105.4114.6265.1244.9449.081.4262.6
2015 Q1 2,311.936.1449.7117.3438.0106.0115.9266.2247.9452.682.1260.0
         Q2 2,324.436.2452.5116.7440.6107.3115.1268.4251.0453.982.8266.6
         Q3 2,338.135.9453.4117.2444.4107.7115.1270.4253.5457.083.4268.6
as a percentage of value added2014100.01.619.45.118.94.65.011.610.719.63.6
- Chain-linked volumes (prices for the previous year)quarter-on-quarter percentage changes2014 Q4 0.3-1.4
0.10.50.40.50.00.4
0.40.20.11.3
2015 Q1 0.60.9
1.00.60.60.50.40.1
0.90.40.30.0
         Q2 0.30.0
0.4-0.40.20.80.20.3
0.90.00.51.2
         Q3 0.30.7
0.0-0.20.50.4-0.40.6
0.50.30.40.4
annual percentage changes2012-0.7-3.4-1.0-5.8-0.62.2-0.70.2
-0.50.0-0.8-2.6
2013-0.23.2-0.6-3.5-0.82.5-2.11.1
0.10.4-0.5-1.2
20140.93.2
0.5-0.61.31.9-0.11.2
1.40.50.91.0
2014 Q4 0.8-0.2
0.2-1.01.41.80.51.2
1.80.41.02.2
2015 Q1 1.10.3
1.3-0.71.51.61.11.2
2.30.60.92.2
         Q2 1.50.4
1.80.41.72.31.21.1
2.70.71.32.7
         Q3 1.40.2
1.50.51.82.10.31.4
2.70.91.32.9
contributions to quarter-on-quarter percentage changes in value added; percentage points2014 Q4 0.30.0
0.00.00.10.00.00.0
0.00.00.0
- 2015 Q1 0.60.0
0.20.00.10.00.00.0
0.10.10.0
-          Q2 0.30.0
0.10.00.00.00.00.0
0.10.00.0
-          Q3 0.30.0
0.00.00.10.00.00.1
0.10.10.0
- contributions to annual percentage changes in value added; percentage points2012-0.7-0.1-0.2-0.3-0.10.10.00.0
-0.10.00.0
- 2013-0.20.1-0.1-0.2-0.20.1-0.10.1
0.00.10.0
- 20140.90.1
0.10.00.20.10.00.1
0.10.10.0
- 2014 Q4 0.80.0
0.00.00.30.10.00.1
0.20.10.0
- 2015 Q1 1.10.0
0.20.00.30.10.10.1
0.20.10.0
-          Q2 1.50.0
0.30.00.30.10.10.1
0.30.10.0
-          Q3 1.40.0
0.30.00.30.10.00.2
0.30.20.0
- Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.S 103 Economic activityS 10ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics3.3 Employment 1)(quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Persons employed       Total   By employment
   By economic activity   status   Employ-Self-Agricul-Manufac-Con-Trade,Infor-FinanceRealProfessional,Public adminis-Arts,
eesemployedture,turing,struc-transport,mationandestatebusiness andtration, edu-entertainment
forestryenergytionaccom-andinsur-
supportcation, healthand other
andand
modationcom-ance
servicesandservices
fishingutilities
and foodmunica-
social workservicestion
12345678910
111213as a percentage of total persons employed2012100.084.915.13.415.46.424.82.72.71.012.7
23.87.02013100.085.015.03.415.36.224.82.72.71.012.9
24.07.02014100.085.114.93.415.26.024.82.72.71.013.0
24.17.1annual percentage changes2012-0.4-0.50.0-1.1-0.7-4.4-0.61.1-0.40.2
0.80.00.42013-0.7-0.6-1.0-1.6-1.3-4.2-0.80.3-1.0-1.9
0.30.2-0.220140.60.7-0.30.6-0.1-1.80.70.8-0.91.0
1.90.80.72014 Q4 0.81.0-0.20.20.3-1.40.90.6-0.51.6
2.40.81.82015 Q1 0.91.1-0.1-0.30.3-0.11.20.5-0.31.5
2.70.60.7         Q2 1.01.10.20.30.20.91.01.00.42.5
2.80.61.0         Q3 1.11.3-0.20.10.4-0.31.21.50.02.4
3.00.81.0Hours workedas a percentage of total hours worked2012100.080.020.04.415.77.225.82.82.81.012.4
21.66.32013100.080.119.94.415.76.925.82.92.81.012.5
21.86.32014100.080.319.74.415.76.725.82.92.71.012.7
21.96.3annual percentage changes2012-1.6-1.6-1.5-2.3-2.2-6.8-1.70.7-1.0-0.8
-0.3-0.5-0.82013-1.4-1.4-1.8-1.4-1.5-5.5-1.6-0.1-1.6-3.1
-0.8-0.4-1.420140.60.8-0.40.10.4-1.70.61.2-1.00.7
2.01.00.02014 Q4 1.01.20.10.71.0-1.10.81.4-0.81.6
2.90.91.22015 Q1 0.81.0-0.10.80.5-0.30.70.6-0.62.4
2.50.61.2         Q2 1.11.30.31.00.91.20.71.50.43.3
3.30.61.2         Q3 1.31.60.20.71.00.41.02.6-0.23.7
3.70.91.2Hours worked per person employedannual percentage changes2012-1.2-1.1-1.6-1.2-1.5-2.5-1.1-0.4-0.6-1.0
-1.1-0.5-1.22013-0.8-0.7-0.80.2-0.2-1.4-0.8-0.4-0.6-1.3
-1.0-0.5-1.220140.00.1-0.1-0.50.50.1-0.10.30.0-0.3
0.10.2-0.62014 Q4 0.10.10.40.50.70.4-0.10.8-0.30.0
0.40.1-0.62015 Q1 -0.10.00.01.10.2-0.3-0.50.2-0.30.9
-0.20.00.4         Q2 0.10.20.10.70.60.3-0.30.50.00.8
0.4-0.10.2         Q3 0.30.30.40.50.50.7-0.11.0-0.21.3
0.70.10.2Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Data for employment are based on the ESA 2010.S 11
3 Economic activityS 11ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics3.4 Labour force, unemployment and job vacancies(seasonally adjusted, unless otherwise indicated)LabourUnder-
   UnemploymentJobforce,employ-   
      vacancymillions 1)ment,   TotalLong-term
   By age   By genderrate 2)% ofunemploy-   
         labourMillions% ofment,   Adult
   Youth   Male   Femaleforce 1)labour% of
forcelabourMillions% ofMillions% ofMillions% ofMillions% of% of total
force 1)labourlabourlabourlabourposts
forceforceforceforce1234567891011121314
% of total  100.0  81.3 18.7 53.6 46.4  
in 2013              
2012159.1114.018.18711.45.214.63110.13.55523.69.75411.28.43311.51.6
2013159.3344.619.23112.05.915.63810.83.59424.310.30911.98.92212.11.5
2014160.3074.618.63311.66.115.22110.43.41323.79.93111.58.70211.81.7
2014 Q4 160.9564.618.42811.56.115.11510.33.31323.29.79911.38.62811.61.8
2015 Q1 160.0894.717.96211.25.914.73310.13.23022.79.52411.08.43911.41.7
         Q2 160.4614.617.71711.05.714.5249.93.19322.69.41710.98.30011.21.7
         Q3 160.5544.417.26310.85.314.1219.63.14322.49.17010.68.09310.91.6
2015 June - - 17.66711.0- 14.4739.93.19422.69.38610.98.28111.2- 
         July - - 17.37010.8- 14.2509.73.12022.39.23210.78.13811.0- 
         Aug. - - 17.29010.8- 14.1369.63.15422.59.17310.68.11611.0- 
         Sep. - - 17.13010.7- 13.9769.53.15422.49.10410.58.02610.8- 
         Oct. - - 17.05410.6- 13.8709.53.18422.69.10910.57.94510.7- 
         Nov. - - 16.92410.5- 13.7579.43.16722.59.04110.47.88310.6- 
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Not seasonally adjusted.
2) The job vacancy rate is equal to the number of job vacancies divided by the sum of the number of occupied posts and the number of job vacancies, expressed as a percentage.3.5 Short-term business statistics   Industrial productionCon-ECB indicator
   Retail salesNew      structionon industrial
passenger   Total   Main Industrial Groupingsproduc-new ordersTotalFood,Non-foodFuelcar regis-
   (excluding construction)   tionbeverages,trationstobaccoManu-Inter-CapitalConsumerEnergy
facturingmediategoodsgoods
goods1234567
8910111213
% of total100.086.033.629.222.514.7100.0100.0100.039.351.59.1100.0
in 2010             
annual percentage changes2013-0.7-0.7-1.0-0.6-0.4-0.8-2.3
-0.1-0.8-0.9-0.6-0.9-4.4
20140.81.71.21.82.6-5.51.7
3.31.20.32.20.03.8
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . 8.9
2015 Q1 1.61.1-0.11.12.44.6-1.6
1.12.31.13.42.39.0
         Q2 1.31.70.92.70.9-1.1-0.6
5.52.51.33.52.76.9
         Q3 1.72.00.82.52.6-0.1-0.5
2.13.12.23.83.29.4
         Q4 . . . . . . . . . . . . 10.4
2015 July 1.81.60.01.83.03.8-0.3
3.23.52.34.23.29.9
         Aug. 2.12.81.14.03.1-2.3-1.4
3.32.62.72.74.38.3
         Sep. 1.41.81.31.91.8-1.80.1
-0.13.21.64.72.29.8
         Oct. 2.02.21.43.41.11.00.8
0.62.41.13.31.85.8
         Nov. 1.11.62.11.21.2-2.82.1
. 1.40.81.81.810.9
         Dec. . . . . . . . . . . . . 15.1
month-on-month percentage changes (s.a.)2015 July 0.80.8-0.41.71.22.00.4
-1.60.60.50.60.11.9
         Aug. -0.5-0.10.4-0.90.2-3.70.5
-1.70.10.6-0.21.7-0.5
         Sep. -0.2-0.30.1-0.2-1.61.5-0.7
-1.9-0.1-0.60.0-0.70.8
         Oct. 0.80.60.01.30.91.60.6
1.6-0.2-0.50.0-0.1-1.0
         Nov. -0.7-0.40.7-1.9-0.1-4.30.8
. -0.3-0.1-0.4-0.72.5
         Dec. . . . . . . . . . . . . 8.0
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations, ECB experimental statistics (col. 8) and European Automobile Manufacturers Association (col. 13).S 123 Economic activityS 12ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics3.6 Opinion surveys(seasonally adjusted)         (percentage balances, unless otherwise indicated)   (diffusion indices)      Economic   Manufacturing industryConsumerConstructionRetail   Service industriesPurchasingManu-BusinessComposite


indicatorIndustrialCapacityindicatorindicatorconfid-ServicesCapacityIndex (PMI)outputfor
(long-termconfidenceutilisation
enceconfidenceutilisationfor manu-
servicesaverageindicator(%)
indicatorindicator(%)facturing
= 100)123
456
789101112
1999-13100.2-6.180.9-12.7-13.8-8.76.6
- 51.052.452.952.7
201393.8-9.178.7-18.5-29.2-12.2-5.487.149.650.649.349.7
2014101.6-3.980.4-10.0-27.4-3.24.887.651.853.352.552.7
2015104.3-3.1. -6.1-22.91.59.1
. 52.253.454.053.8
2015 Q1 102.6-4.081.1-6.2-24.9-1.65.688.251.452.653.653.3
         Q2 103.7-3.281.1-5.1-24.9-0.27.688.352.353.454.153.9
         Q3 104.6-3.081.3-6.9-23.22.910.588.452.353.654.053.9
         Q4 106.3-2.4. -6.4-18.74.912.7
. 52.854.054.254.1
2015 July 104.0-2.981.1-7.0-23.81.18.988.152.453.654.053.9
         Aug. 104.1-3.7- -6.7-22.73.510.1
- 52.353.954.454.3
         Sep. 105.6-2.3- -7.0-23.24.212.4
- 52.053.453.753.6
         Oct. 106.1-2.081.5-7.5-20.76.412.388.752.353.654.153.9
         Nov. 106.1-3.2- -5.9-17.85.612.8
- 52.854.054.254.2
         Dec. 106.8-2.0- -5.7-17.62.813.1
- 53.254.554.254.3
Sources: European Commission (Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs) (col. 1-8) and Markit (col. 9-12).3.7 Summary accounts for households and non-financial corporations(current prices, unless otherwise indicated; not seasonally adjusted)         Households   Non-financial corporationsSavingDebtReal grossFinancialNon-financialNetHous-ProfitSavingDebtFinancialNon-financialFinan-
ratioratiodisposableinvestmentinvestmentworthingshare
 3)ratioratio
 4)investmentinvestmentcing
(gross) 1)income(gross) 2)wealth(net)(gross)                                                             Percentage of      Percentage of netPercent-
      gross disposable   Annual percentage changes   value addedage of   Annual percentage changes
   income (adjusted)      GDP   12
34567891011
1213
201212.597.8-1.81.7-5.10.6-3.031.01.7134.41.5-6.71.2
201312.796.4-0.41.3-4.10.4-1.831.93.1131.92.3-0.81.0
201412.795.70.71.9
1.02.61.131.73.3132.61.8
3.61.0
2014 Q4 12.795.70.91.9
0.92.71.131.73.3132.61.7
1.41.0
2015 Q1 12.795.32.01.8-0.53.71.431.93.6134.72.5
2.21.4
         Q2 12.895.02.21.9-0.52.61.532.64.2134.23.0
5.01.6
         Q3 ..1.82.0
1.02.42.033.04.9133.13.6
2.81.9
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.1) Based on four-quarter cumulated sums of both saving and gross disposable income (adjusted for the change in the net equity of households in pension fund reserves).2) Financial assets (net of financial liabilities) and non-financial assets. Non-financial assets consist mainly of housing wealth (residential structures and land). They also includenon-financial assets of unincorporated enterprises classified within the household sector.3) The profit share uses net entrepreneurial income, which is broadly equivalent to current profits in business accounting. 
4) Based on the outstanding amount of loans, debt securities, trade credits and pension scheme liabilities.S 133 Economic activityS 13ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics3.8 Euro area balance of payments, current and capital accounts(EUR billions; seasonally adjusted unless otherwise indicated; transactions)         Current account   Capital                  account 1)   Total   Goods   Services   Primary income   Secondary income   
CreditDebitNetCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebitCreditDebit
12345678910111213
2014 Q4 863.3792.371.0506.3432.3179.5164.8153.3136.824.158.512.76.0
2015 Q1 876.7796.879.9512.8437.5184.3169.4154.1130.425.559.58.77.5
         Q2 896.6817.179.5525.4444.8188.0171.8156.8141.626.458.99.637.3
         Q3 886.8810.376.5516.2434.1189.6174.0156.0144.025.058.29.63.9
2015 June 297.7271.526.2175.3147.762.957.751.046.88.519.23.334.4
         July 297.4271.725.8174.4145.762.858.152.148.58.119.43.31.4
         Aug. 293.6270.523.1170.2144.963.458.051.248.28.819.43.41.0
         Sep. 295.8268.127.7171.6143.563.457.952.747.38.119.43.01.5
         Oct. 297.3271.725.6172.5144.563.858.652.248.78.719.94.51.9
         Nov. 293.1266.726.4169.1142.163.657.651.847.28.719.73.91.8
12-month cumulated transactions2015 Nov. 3,539.83,227.6312.22,065.61,747.1749.5687.7622.3556.9102.3235.942.155.7
12-month cumulated transactions as a percentage of GDP2015 Nov. 34.331.33.020.016.97.36.76.05.41.02.30.40.5
1) The capital account is not seasonally adjusted.3.9 Euro area external trade in goods 1), values and volumes by product group 2)(seasonally adjusted, unless otherwise indicated)Values (EUR billions; annual percentage changes for columns 1 and 2)            Total (n.s.a.)   Exports (f.o.b.)   Imports (c.i.f.)            TotalMemo item:   Total   Memo items:ExportsImportsIntermediateCapitalConsump-Manu-IntermediateCapitalConsump-Manu-Oil
goodsgoodstionfacturing
goodsgoodstionfacturing
goodsgoods123
45
678
91011
1213
2014 Q4 4.40.6499.2237.3103.2145.9408.8437.1261.764.1104.2294.266.1
2015 Q1 5.61.9509.3241.7105.3149.5422.0447.8260.170.2109.7315.155.4
         Q2 8.24.2513.4242.4105.3153.5428.5453.3265.470.3110.8317.260.0
         Q3 4.30.8506.7234.6104.5153.7421.9445.3254.569.7112.9316.250.9
2015 June 12.67.0171.880.635.651.6143.5152.588.823.637.7107.419.7
         July 6.90.7172.779.535.352.5143.4150.386.523.337.7106.318.2
         Aug. 5.52.7166.377.634.350.7137.8147.183.923.037.6103.817.0
         Sep. 0.7-0.8167.877.434.850.5140.7148.084.123.337.6106.115.7
         Oct. 0.4-0.7168.179.634.950.8142.5148.284.324.537.3107.015.5
         Nov. 6.14.5170.8
. . . 139.7148.1
. . . 106.5. 
Volume indices (2000 = 100; annual percentage changes for columns 1 and 2)2014 Q4 2.92.3118.0113.8120.8122.2117.3102.9102.8101.9103.7104.697.7
2015 Q1 2.65.2119.0115.3120.7123.3118.9106.6106.6106.9105.9108.6105.9
         Q2 2.92.7117.1113.6118.9121.6118.0104.1104.2103.4104.7107.099.5
         Q3 1.13.1116.6111.6117.8122.5116.6105.8105.6104.8106.5107.399.3
2015 May -2.7-2.0116.3112.9116.9120.3117.0102.4102.3100.9103.7104.499.7
         June 7.96.7117.6113.8120.4122.4118.6105.6105.5103.7107.2109.197.3
         July 3.01.7118.8112.7119.1125.4118.8106.1105.1106.2107.8108.897.0
         Aug. 2.05.4114.9111.0115.5121.4113.8105.1105.3103.4105.6105.0100.5
         Sep. -1.72.5116.3111.2118.8120.9117.2106.3106.5104.7105.9108.1100.3
         Oct. -1.73.4117.0
. . . 118.7107.1
. . . 109.699.6
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.initions.2) Product groups as classified in the Broad Economic Categories.S 144 Prices and costsS 14ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics4.1 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1)(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)            Total   Total (s.a.; percentage change vis-à-vis previous period)   Memo item:
   Administered pricesIndex:   TotalGoodsServicesTotalProcessedUnpro-Non-energyEnergyServices
2005foodcessedindustrial(n.s.a.)
Total HICPAdminis-
= 100Totalfoodgoods
excludingtered
excludingadministeredprices
food andpricesenergy12345678
91011
1213
% of total100.0100.069.756.543.5100.012.27.526.310.643.587.112.9
in 2015             
2013117.21.41.11.31.4-
--
---
1.22.1
2014117.70.40.8-0.21.2-
--
---
0.21.9
2015117.80.00.8-0.81.2-
--
---
-0.10.9
2015 Q1 116.8-0.30.7-1.41.1-0.30.20.60.1-4.20.3
-0.51.2
         Q2 118.40.20.8-0.51.10.50.30.70.22.40.4
0.10.9
         Q3 117.80.10.9-0.81.20.00.10.50.2-2.50.4
0.00.8
         Q4 118.00.21.0-0.61.2-0.10.20.80.1-3.00.2
0.10.6
2015 July 117.70.21.0-0.51.20.00.0-0.60.1-0.70.2
0.10.9
         Aug. 117.70.10.9-0.71.2-0.10.11.20.0-2.20.1
0.00.9
         Sep. 118.0-0.10.9-1.11.2-0.10.00.60.0-1.70.0
-0.20.7
         Oct. 118.20.11.1-0.81.30.10.00.40.1-0.50.1
0.00.6
         Nov. 118.00.10.9-0.61.20.00.1-0.20.00.00.0
0.10.6
         Dec. 118.00.20.9-0.51.1-0.30.0-0.90.0-1.80.0
0.20.6
         Goods   Services            Food (including alcoholic   Industrial goods   HousingTransportCommuni-RecreationMiscel-
   beverages and tobacco)      cationandlaneous
personalTotalProcessedUnpro-TotalNon-energyEnergy
Rentsfoodcessed
industrialfoodgoods14151617
1819202122232425
% of total19.712.27.536.9
26.310.610.76.47.33.114.87.5
in 2015            
20132.72.23.50.6
0.60.61.71.52.4-4.22.20.7
20140.51.2-0.8-0.5
0.1-1.91.71.41.7-2.81.41.3
20151.00.61.6-1.8
0.3-6.81.21.21.3-0.81.51.2
2015 Q1 0.30.50.1-2.3
-0.1-7.71.31.31.4-1.91.31.2
         Q2 1.10.71.8-1.3
0.2-5.31.21.21.2-0.91.41.2
         Q3 1.20.62.1-1.8
0.4-7.21.21.11.4-0.41.61.0
         Q4 1.40.72.6-1.7
0.5-7.21.21.01.1-0.11.51.2
2015 July 0.90.61.4-1.3
0.4-5.61.21.11.5-0.71.61.0
         Aug. 1.30.62.4-1.8
0.4-7.21.21.11.2-0.41.71.0
         Sep. 1.40.62.7-2.4
0.3-8.91.31.11.4-0.11.51.1
         Oct. 1.60.63.2-2.1
0.6-8.51.21.11.4-0.11.81.2
         Nov. 1.50.72.7-1.7
0.5-7.31.21.01.2-0.21.31.2
         Dec. 1.20.72.0-1.3
0.5-5.81.21.00.7-0.11.51.2
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.S 154 Prices and costsS 15ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics4.2 Industry, construction and property prices(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)   Industrial producer prices excluding constructionCon-ResidentialExperimental
      structionpropertyindicator of
Total   Total
   Industry excluding construction and energyEnergy
prices 1)commercial(index:   property2010 = 100)Manu-TotalIntermediateCapital   Consumer goods
prices 1)facturinggoodsgoods
TotalFood,Non-
beveragesfood
and tobacco1234
567
891011
1213% of total100.0100.078.072.129.320.022.713.88.927.9   
in 2010             
2012108.72.82.01.4
0.71.02.53.50.96.61.5
-1.6-0.12013108.5-0.2-0.10.4-0.60.61.72.60.3-1.60.3
-1.9-1.12014106.9-1.5-0.9-0.3-1.10.40.1-0.20.3-4.40.3
0.21.12014 Q4 106.0-1.9-1.6-0.3-0.70.6-0.6-1.20.2-5.80.2
0.82.42015 Q1 104.5-2.9-2.6-0.6-1.50.7-0.7-1.30.2-8.50.2
1.12.5         Q2 104.9-2.1-1.6-0.3-0.70.7-0.8-1.40.1-6.50.4
1.13.2         Q3 104.0-2.6-2.6-0.5-1.10.6-0.6-1.10.2-8.30.2
1.5. 2015 June 104.9-2.1-1.7-0.3-0.60.7-0.8-1.40.1-6.8- - - 
         July 104.7-2.1-2.0-0.3-0.70.7-0.8-1.30.1-6.5- - - 
         Aug. 103.8-2.7-2.7-0.5-1.10.6-0.7-1.20.2-8.2- - - 
         Sep. 103.5-3.2-3.0-0.6-1.60.6-0.4-0.60.2-10.0- - - 
         Oct. 103.1-3.2-2.8-0.7-1.90.6-0.1-0.20.2-9.8- - - 
         Nov. 102.9-3.2-2.5-0.7-2.00.6-0.2-0.30.2-9.4- - - 
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations, and ECB calculations based on MSCI data and national sources (col. 13).1) Experimental data based on non-harmonised sources (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/html/experiment.en.html for further details).4.3 Commodity prices and GDP deflators(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)   GDP deflatorsOil prices   Non-energy commodity prices  (EUR)
   (EUR per      TotalTotal   Domestic demand
Exports 1)Imports 1)barrel)   Import-weighted
 2)   Use-weighted 2)(s.a.;index:TotalPrivateGovern-Gross
TotalFoodNon-foodTotalFoodNon-food
2010consump-mentfixed
= 100)tionconsump-capital
tionformation
123456789101112131415
% of total         100.035.065.0100.045.055.0
               
2013103.71.31.01.11.20.5-0.3-1.381.7-9.0-13.4-6.9-8.3-10.1-6.9
2014104.60.90.50.50.90.5-0.7-1.774.5-8.8-1.6-12.1-4.60.7-8.7
2015. . . . . . . . 48.3-4.15.2-9.0-0.84.9-5.6
2015 Q1 105.31.00.0-0.10.50.5-0.1-2.549.0-0.48.7-4.95.611.60.7
         Q2 105.71.30.40.40.80.80.9-1.257.4-0.52.1-2.04.05.62.6
         Q3 106.01.30.40.30.60.60.0-2.246.1-6.56.5-13.1-3.35.8-10.6
         Q4 . . . . . . . . 40.7-9.23.9-16.2-9.5-3.2-14.8
2015 July - - - - - - - - 51.7-3.611.1-11.00.59.8-7.1
         Aug. - - - - - - - - 43.0-8.14.4-14.4-4.45.2-12.1
         Sep. - - - - - - - - 43.3-7.93.9-13.8-6.02.4-12.6
         Oct. - - - - - - - - 43.9-8.33.8-14.6-6.90.8-13.3
         Nov. - - - - - - - - 42.8-8.06.1-15.6-8.7-1.8-14.7
         Dec. - - - - - - - - 35.7-11.21.9-18.5-12.7-8.3-16.5
Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations and Thomson Reuters (col. 9).1) Deflators for exports and imports refer to goods and services and include cross-border trade within the euro area.
2) Import-weighted: weighted according to 2004-06 average import structure; use-weighted: weighted according to 2004-06 average domestic demand structure.S 164 Prices and costsS 16ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics4.4 Price-related opinion surveys(seasonally adjusted)         (percentage balances)   (diffusion indices)            Selling price expectationsConsumer   Input prices
   Prices charged   (for next three months)price trends      over pastManu-Retail tradeServicesConstruction12 monthsManu-ServicesManu-Services
facturingfacturingfacturing123456789
1999-134.8- - -1.8
34.157.756.7
- 49.92013-0.31.7-1.2
-17.129.948.553.849.447.8
2014-0.8-1.41.2
-17.614.449.653.549.748.2
2015-2.61.42.7
-13.6-1.048.953.549.649.0
2015 Q1 -5.5-0.71.4
-17.0-2.445.852.548.847.6
         Q2 -1.13.33.0
-15.4-0.854.754.450.449.0
         Q3 -1.81.12.4
-13.0-0.149.553.649.949.9
         Q4 -2.01.94.0
-8.9-0.845.653.649.249.6
2015 July -0.10.82.1
-14.00.954.454.350.449.5
         Aug. -2.03.02.2
-13.00.349.653.150.549.9
         Sep. -3.3-0.62.9
-12.1-1.644.653.548.750.4
         Oct. -2.32.14.8
-10.3-2.344.354.048.649.9
         Nov. -0.72.44.3
-9.1-0.445.653.349.349.6
         Dec. -3.01.32.8
-7.20.347.053.549.849.4
Sources: European Commission (Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs) and Markit.4.5 Labour cost indices(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)      TotalTotal   By component
   For selected economic activitiesMemo item:
(index:Indicator of
salariescontributions
economywages
 1)1234567
% of total100.0100.074.625.469.330.7 in 2012       
2012100.02.32.32.42.61.72.22013101.41.51.51.11.21.91.82014102.71.31.31.31.31.31.72014 Q4 108.01.21.11.51.11.31.72015 Q1 97.61.92.11.12.01.51.4         Q2 108.21.62.00.31.61.41.5         Q3 101.61.11.40.11.20.81.5Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1) Experimental data based on non-harmonised sources (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/intro/html/experiment.en.html for further details).S 174 Prices and costsS 17ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics4.6 Unit labour costs, compensation per labour input and labour productivity(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated; quarterly data seasonally adjusted; annual data unadjusted)Unit labour costs TotalTotal
   By economic activity(index:2010Agriculture,Manu-Con-Trade,InformationFinanceRealProfessional,Public ad-Arts, enter-
=100)forestryfacturing,structiontransport,and commu-andestatebusiness andministration,tainment
and fishingenergy and
accom-nicationinsurance
supporteducation,and other
utilitiesmodation andserviceshealth andservices
food servicessocial work12
345
6789
1011122012102.51.92.62.14.0
1.70.41.20.9
3.30.82.8
2013103.71.2-1.12.10.5
0.9-1.43.1-2.8
1.11.42.0
2014104.91.1-3.91.60.5
0.81.10.61.3
2.31.30.9
2014 Q4 105.21.3-0.82.20.9
0.91.61.11.8
2.41.51.1
2015 Q1 105.30.90.30.91.6
0.80.70.13.2
2.31.10.4
         Q2 105.50.71.20.41.1
0.61.00.72.9
1.31.10.3
         Q3 105.60.61.40.30.4
0.61.11.63.0
1.40.9-0.2
Compensation per employee 2012103.61.50.21.92.4
1.71.40.90.9
1.90.81.6
2013105.21.63.82.81.2
0.90.82.00.2
1.01.71.7
2014106.71.4-1.42.21.7
1.42.11.41.5
1.70.91.1
2014 Q4 107.31.4-1.22.11.3
1.32.72.11.5
1.71.10.3
2015 Q1 107.71.20.91.90.9
1.01.81.53.0
1.81.00.5
         Q2 107.91.31.31.90.6
1.42.41.41.5
1.21.10.6
         Q3 108.11.11.51.41.2
1.21.71.82.0
1.10.90.1
Labour productivity per person employed2012101.0-0.4-2.3-0.3-1.5
0.01.1-0.30.0-1.4
0.0-1.2
2013101.40.45.00.60.7
0.02.2-1.13.0-0.1
0.2-0.3
2014101.70.32.60.61.2
0.61.10.80.2-0.5
-0.40.3
2014 Q4 102.00.1-0.4-0.10.5
0.51.21.0-0.3-0.6
-0.3-0.9
2015 Q1 102.30.40.61.0-0.7
0.31.11.4-0.3-0.4
-0.10.1
         Q2 102.30.60.11.6-0.5
0.71.30.8-1.4-0.1
0.00.4
         Q3 102.30.50.01.10.8
0.60.60.3-1.0-0.3
0.00.3
Compensation per hour worked 2012104.82.62.23.35.0
2.91.71.21.4
2.91.32.8
2013107.22.33.72.92.6
1.80.92.61.6
2.22.12.9
2014108.61.3-0.71.71.5
1.51.71.31.3
1.30.71.8
2014 Q4 109.11.2-1.01.50.9
1.41.82.21.3
1.21.01.0
2015 Q1 109.41.30.91.70.5
1.51.02.02.6
2.01.0-0.3
         Q2 109.51.10.41.4-0.1
1.51.41.60.4
0.81.20.4
         Q3 109.60.81.00.80.0
1.10.72.21.5
0.60.9-0.3
Hourly labour productivity2012102.30.7-1.11.21.0
1.21.50.31.0-0.2
0.50.0
2013103.51.24.70.92.2
0.82.6-0.54.4
0.90.80.9
2014103.80.33.10.11.1
0.70.80.90.5-0.6
-0.50.9
2014 Q4 103.80.0-0.9-0.70.1
0.60.41.2-0.4-1.0
-0.5-0.3
2015 Q1 104.20.4-0.50.8-0.4
0.81.01.7-1.2-0.2
0.0-0.3
         Q2 104.20.4-0.60.9-0.8
1.00.80.8-2.2-0.5
0.10.1
         Q3 104.00.3-0.50.50.1
0.8-0.40.5-2.3-1.0
-0.10.1
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.S 185 Money and creditS 18ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics5.1 Monetary aggregates 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts   M3         M2   M3-M2            M1   M2-M1   CurrencyOvernight
DepositsDeposits
ReposMoneyDebt
indeposits
with anredeemable
marketsecurities
circulationagreedat notice
fundwith
maturityof up to
sharesa maturity
of up to3 months
of up to2 years2 years123456789101112
2012864.14,233.35,097.41,798.62,099.63,898.28,995.6126.0483.3181.0790.49,786.0
2013909.74,476.35,386.11,683.32,142.83,826.19,212.1121.4418.186.5626.09,838.1
2014968.54,952.55,921.11,598.42,149.23,747.69,668.7123.9427.7104.7656.310,325.0
2014 Q4 968.54,952.55,921.11,598.42,149.23,747.69,668.7123.9427.7104.7656.310,325.0
2015 Q1 993.55,155.46,148.91,529.12,150.03,679.09,827.9125.8437.596.6659.910,487.8
         Q2 1,014.05,298.86,312.81,480.02,160.73,640.79,953.590.3441.198.6629.910,583.4
         Q3 1,028.25,425.36,453.51,449.12,164.63,613.710,067.298.4457.673.2629.110,696.3
2015 June 1,014.05,298.86,312.81,480.02,160.73,640.79,953.590.3441.198.6629.910,583.4
         July 1,020.25,364.76,384.91,471.32,161.83,633.210,018.1105.0456.286.5647.610,665.7
         Aug. 1,025.05,383.86,408.81,460.32,164.03,624.310,033.1102.4446.280.4629.010,662.1
         Sep. 1,028.25,425.36,453.51,449.12,164.63,613.710,067.298.4457.673.2629.110,696.3
         Oct. 1,029.95,487.56,517.51,438.32,164.43,602.710,120.2106.8473.177.3657.110,777.3
         Nov. (p)1,037.45,543.36,580.81,448.02,162.73,610.710,191.591.4484.282.7658.410,849.8
Transactions201220.4294.0314.4-38.5115.577.0391.4-16.9-20.2-18.3-55.4335.9
201345.6250.4295.9-114.445.5-68.9227.0-11.6-48.7-63.3-123.6103.4
201458.2379.6437.8-91.03.6-87.3350.51.010.812.724.6375.0
2014 Q4 20.0147.3167.3-47.4-5.5-52.9114.5-3.110.119.126.1140.6
2015 Q1 23.8166.9190.6-56.81.6-55.3135.40.65.6-9.3-3.0132.4
         Q2 20.5151.6172.0-47.711.0-36.6135.4-35.23.63.9-27.7107.7
         Q3 14.3129.0143.3-35.33.1-32.3111.08.218.7-18.58.4119.4
2015 June 7.645.853.4-8.83.8-4.948.5-19.7-3.04.8-17.930.6
         July 6.361.968.2-13.81.2-12.655.614.515.1-11.917.773.3
         Aug. 4.724.529.2-9.42.3-7.122.1-2.32.2-2.6-2.619.5
         Sep. 3.242.745.9-12.2-0.4-12.633.3-4.11.3-4.0-6.726.6
         Oct. 1.758.159.8-12.1-0.3-12.447.48.215.54.928.676.0
         Nov. (p)7.547.454.97.3-1.85.460.4-15.811.35.50.961.3
Growth rates20122.47.46.5-2.15.92.04.5-11.4-3.9-9.7-6.53.5
20135.35.95.8-6.42.2-1.82.5-9.2-10.4-38.0-16.11.0
20146.48.58.1-5.40.2-2.33.80.82.618.74.03.8
2014 Q4 6.48.58.1-5.40.2-2.33.80.82.618.74.03.8
2015 Q1 7.310.610.1-7.60.1-3.34.65.15.311.75.64.7
         Q2 8.812.411.8-10.70.5-4.45.2-30.96.923.70.64.9
         Q3 8.312.411.7-11.40.5-4.75.2-23.09.0-1.60.74.9
2015 June 8.812.411.8-10.70.5-4.45.2-30.96.923.70.64.9
         July 8.912.912.2-11.40.5-4.75.4-19.28.017.62.85.2
         Aug. 8.612.111.5-11.30.6-4.65.1-21.19.58.22.44.9
         Sep. 8.312.411.7-11.40.5-4.75.2-23.09.0-1.60.74.9
         Oct. 8.112.511.8-10.90.6-4.35.4-18.810.07.13.15.3
         Nov. (p)8.011.811.2-9.90.3-4.15.3-29.712.08.22.65.1
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.S 195 Money and creditS 19ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics5.2 Deposits in M3 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts          Non-financial corporations 2)    Households 3) FinancialInsuranceOther
corpor-corpor-general
TotalOvernightWith anRedeem-ReposTotalOvernightWith anRedeem-Reposationsationsgovern-
agreedable
agreedable
other thanandment
 4)maturityat notice
maturityat notice
MFIs andpension
of up toof up to
of up toof up to
ICPFs 2)funds2 years3 months
2 years3 months
12345678910111213
20121,618.41,101.2404.8101.910.55,309.12,358.9976.41,962.810.9812.7210.3307.0
20131,710.51,186.7397.8109.816.25,413.62,539.7874.71,994.54.7804.8194.9300.1
20141,814.91,318.7365.8111.419.25,557.22,751.2809.51,993.53.0896.1222.7333.1
2014 Q4 1,814.91,318.7365.8111.419.25,557.22,751.2809.51,993.53.0896.1222.7333.1
2015 Q1 1,848.11,381.7340.2111.414.95,598.22,839.3762.81,992.33.8948.1225.7340.2
         Q2 1,858.01,410.7322.7112.412.25,647.12,910.6735.01,998.72.8955.7228.1340.9
         Q3 1,900.81,451.1324.2115.310.15,695.22,987.2707.31,997.63.0967.3218.0356.2
2015 June 1,858.01,410.7322.7112.412.25,647.12,910.6735.01,998.72.8955.7228.1340.9
         July 1,889.21,438.2325.1113.412.65,664.62,942.4722.41,996.73.2968.9232.1348.0
         Aug. 1,889.11,441.8325.2114.08.25,674.52,959.9714.71,996.83.1968.1224.7354.2
         Sep. 1,900.81,451.1324.2115.310.15,695.22,987.2707.31,997.63.0967.3218.0356.2
         Oct. 1,937.21,493.5316.6116.910.15,706.03,002.8705.51,994.33.5965.3222.4366.1
         Nov. (p)1,933.91,486.8321.3116.89.15,726.93,032.2698.41,992.53.8992.0222.4370.3
Transactions201271.799.5-33.910.2-4.1222.799.735.3100.4-12.718.715.225.7
201398.290.1-6.99.15.9107.9182.4-100.131.9-6.2-15.1-13.3-7.8
201469.391.2-25.61.22.4141.1209.7-65.8-1.1-1.753.77.521.7
2014 Q4 6.819.6-15.3-1.84.430.068.5-33.6-3.1-1.962.1-5.3-2.2
2015 Q1 29.348.9-14.9-0.1-4.638.879.2-41.1-0.10.835.21.57.5
         Q2 13.531.8-16.61.0-2.650.873.2-28.06.6-1.011.82.80.9
         Q3 42.240.80.33.1-2.148.477.8-27.7-1.90.211.1-10.213.4
2015 June 4.87.7-3.20.30.123.633.1-10.82.4-1.1-1.6-0.8-4.8
         July 27.325.80.11.10.416.631.2-13.0-1.90.411.03.65.2
         Aug. 2.65.60.70.7-4.411.118.4-7.40.2-0.12.3-7.26.2
         Sep. 12.29.4-0.51.32.020.728.2-7.3-0.2-0.1-2.2-6.61.9
         Oct. 34.440.8-8.01.60.010.015.0-2.0-3.40.5-4.44.59.5
         Nov. (p)-8.0-10.33.6-0.2-1.221.328.4-5.5-1.90.322.1-2.44.1
Growth rates20124.79.8-7.713.6-26.54.44.43.75.4-53.82.37.99.3
20136.18.2-1.78.956.42.07.7-10.31.6-56.7-1.9-6.4-2.5
20144.07.6-6.41.114.42.68.3-7.5-0.1-36.96.34.07.3
2014 Q4 4.07.6-6.41.114.42.68.3-7.5-0.1-36.96.34.07.3
2015 Q1 4.79.9-9.80.5-5.42.89.7-11.20.0-31.214.7-0.55.2
         Q2 4.310.6-13.90.9-23.53.010.8-13.90.1-37.813.7-1.15.3
         Q3 5.110.8-12.31.9-32.33.011.1-15.50.1-37.714.3-4.95.8
2015 June 4.310.6-13.90.9-23.53.010.8-13.90.1-37.813.7-1.15.3
         July 5.512.1-14.01.0-10.73.111.2-15.00.1-35.414.4-1.95.6
         Aug. 4.811.2-13.31.2-48.22.910.9-15.30.1-36.914.5-5.66.1
         Sep. 5.110.8-12.31.9-32.33.011.1-15.50.1-37.714.3-4.95.8
         Oct. 7.012.9-11.52.4-26.43.111.0-14.80.0-26.011.0-3.79.8
         Nov. (p)5.410.6-11.11.8-31.73.210.9-14.50.1-20.89.9-4.710.5
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).3) Including non-profit institutions serving households.
4) Refers to the general government sector excluding central government.S 205 Money and creditS 20ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics5.3 Credit to euro area residents 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts         Credit to general government   Credit to other euro area residentsTotalLoansDebtTotal
   LoansDebtEquity and
securities   securitiesnon-money
   TotalTo non-To house-To financialTo insurance
market fundfinancialholds
 4)corporationscorporations
investmentAdjusted forcorpor-
other thanand pension
fund sharesloan salesations
 3)MFIs andfunds
and securi-ICPFs 3)tisation 2)12345
678
91011
1220123,408.91,169.72,239.313,070.210,858.311,263.14,543.95,244.0981.189.31,437.9774.1
20133,404.91,096.72,308.212,709.110,544.410,929.54,353.65,222.8869.298.71,364.7800.0
20143,605.51,131.82,473.712,562.310,510.710,921.34,278.45,200.4903.1128.91,276.9774.7
2014 Q4 3,605.51,131.82,473.712,562.310,510.710,921.34,278.45,200.4903.1128.91,276.9774.7
2015 Q1 3,671.91,148.52,523.512,673.910,611.811,009.14,308.05,234.0935.2134.71,273.9788.2
         Q2 3,680.71,137.42,543.312,636.210,592.210,987.04,291.35,258.5906.8135.51,254.7789.4
         Q3 3,816.11,127.12,689.112,651.410,563.910,962.24,275.05,276.8890.9121.21,310.2777.3
2015 June 3,680.71,137.42,543.312,636.210,592.210,987.04,291.35,258.5906.8135.51,254.7789.4
         July 3,729.41,132.32,597.112,711.910,606.011,005.54,297.55,261.5915.4131.61,302.8803.0
         Aug. 3,767.11,132.32,634.812,696.610,599.011,001.24,290.95,268.8910.8128.61,305.9791.7
         Sep. 3,816.11,127.12,689.112,651.410,563.910,962.24,275.05,276.8890.9121.21,310.2777.3
         Oct. 3,835.51,119.82,715.812,694.310,606.111,002.34,290.25,301.1890.5124.31,296.4791.8
         Nov. (p)3,879.91,119.72,760.212,735.310,649.311,045.84,307.85,308.5908.7124.31,287.7798.3
Transactions2012184.2-4.0188.2-99.8-69.8-54.1-108.025.514.5-1.9-68.738.7
2013-25.0-73.548.5-305.9-248.1-268.7-132.9-4.0-120.99.7-72.815.0
201472.016.056.1-104.3-50.5-32.4-59.8-15.212.811.7-90.036.3
2014 Q4 44.210.134.04.019.514.91.87.15.25.4-33.818.3
2015 Q1 40.616.524.133.945.231.58.019.212.75.3-3.8-7.5
         Q2 57.9-10.768.60.88.01.9-1.130.7-22.61.0-14.06.7
         Q3 112.1-10.2122.354.0-8.6-3.9-5.723.9-12.4-14.464.2-1.6
2015 June 11.5-5.517.0-4.50.6-9.0-0.918.1-11.0-5.6-7.62.5
         July 30.1-4.034.169.514.220.25.34.18.8-4.046.98.4
         Aug. 47.0-0.147.114.63.64.2-1.19.1-1.5-3.011.8-0.7
         Sep. 35.0-6.141.1-30.1-26.4-28.3-9.910.6-19.7-7.45.6-9.3
         Oct. 10.1-7.717.828.236.536.016.414.92.13.1-16.38.1
         Nov. (p)38.6-0.238.818.435.631.712.87.915.1-0.1-20.83.6
Growth rates20125.8-0.39.4-0.7-0.6-0.5-2.30.51.5-2.1-4.55.3
2013-0.7-6.32.2-2.3-2.3-2.4-2.9-0.1-12.310.9-5.11.9
20142.11.52.4-0.8-0.5-0.3-1.4-0.31.311.9-6.64.5
2014 Q4 2.11.52.4-0.8-0.5-0.3-1.4-0.31.311.9-6.64.5
2015 Q1 2.81.93.2-0.20.10.2-0.60.02.314.1-4.93.2
         Q2 5.11.66.70.20.60.3-0.21.2-1.117.8-5.23.0
         Q3 7.20.510.20.70.60.40.11.6-2.1-1.41.01.9
2015 June 5.11.66.70.20.60.3-0.21.2-1.117.8-5.23.0
         July 5.50.87.70.80.90.60.21.30.810.1-1.93.3
         Aug. 6.31.08.81.01.00.70.21.40.512.4-0.33.3
         Sep. 7.20.510.20.70.60.40.11.6-2.1-1.41.01.9
         Oct. 6.90.29.91.01.00.80.51.7-1.51.90.22.5
         Nov. (p)7.8-0.611.71.21.31.00.91.9-0.2-1.5-0.53.4
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Adjusted for the derecognition of loans on the MFI balance sheet on account of their sale or securitisation.
3) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).4) Including non-profit institutions serving households.S 215 Money and creditS 21ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics5.4 MFI loans to euro area non-financial corporations and households 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts         Non-financial corporations 2)    Households 3)         TotalUp to 1 yearOver 1Over 5 years   Total
Loans forLoans forOther loans
and up toconsumptionhouse
Adjusted for5 yearsAdjusted forpurchaseloan salesloan salesand securi-and securi-tisation 4)tisation 4)1234567891
020124,543.94,604.61,128.1795.62,620.25,244.05,579.9602.13,825.1816.8
20134,353.64,407.71,065.7740.92,547.05,222.85,546.6573.63,853.7795.5
20144,278.44,336.41,081.4724.72,472.35,200.45,545.9563.43,861.0775.9
2014 Q4 4,278.44,336.41,081.4724.72,472.35,200.45,545.9563.43,861.0775.9
2015 Q1 4,308.04,363.81,089.9738.62,479.55,234.05,570.9567.83,890.9775.3
         Q2 4,291.34,347.61,080.9743.12,467.35,258.55,589.7578.73,908.9771.0
         Q3 4,275.04,333.91,058.3746.22,470.65,276.85,610.6582.43,925.8768.5
2015 June 4,291.34,347.61,080.9743.12,467.35,258.55,589.7578.73,908.9771.0
         July 4,297.54,355.61,082.2744.22,471.25,261.55,597.3579.63,911.9770.1
         Aug. 4,290.94,349.91,083.7743.02,464.25,268.85,605.9581.63,917.2770.0
         Sep. 4,275.04,333.91,058.3746.22,470.65,276.85,610.6582.43,925.8768.5
         Oct. 4,290.24,350.61,062.5755.82,471.95,301.15,629.3594.73,940.0766.4
         Nov. (p)4,307.84,365.71,077.5755.32,475.05,308.55,637.7596.63,943.7768.2
Transactions2012-108.0-74.06.1-51.4-62.725.57.7-17.748.3-5.1
2013-132.9-145.1-44.3-44.6-44.0-4.0-15.0-18.227.4-13.2
2014-59.8-62.9-13.5
2.6-48.9-15.26.1-2.9-3.4-8.9
2014 Q4 1.8-1.6-4.9
7.3-0.77.13.9-1.710.8-2.0
2015 Q1 8.05.3-1.0
7.31.719.211.1
2.017.4-0.2
         Q2 -1.10.0-3.7
7.0-4.430.720.8
9.422.5-1.2
         Q3 -5.7-0.4-19.2
4.39.223.925.1
5.219.2-0.5
2015 June -0.9-2.3-2.2
1.7-0.518.18.1
8.310.3-0.5
         July 5.38.90.7
0.54.04.18.8
1.43.3-0.6
         Aug. -1.10.03.9-0.1-4.99.18.0
2.46.40.3
         Sep. -9.9-9.3-23.8
3.910.010.68.2
1.39.5-0.2
         Oct. 16.419.53.310.22.814.98.9
2.912.6-0.6
         Nov. (p)12.89.316.1-2.7-0.67.98.7
2.53.12.2
Growth rates2012-2.3-1.60.5-6.0-2.30.50.1-2.81.3-0.6
2013-2.9-3.2-4.0-5.6-1.7-0.1-0.3-3.00.7-1.6
2014-1.4-1.4-1.3
0.4-1.9-0.30.1-0.5-0.1-1.1
2014 Q4 -1.4-1.4-1.3
0.4-1.9-0.30.1-0.5-0.1-1.1
2015 Q1 -0.6-0.6-0.7
2.1-1.30.00.3-0.10.1-0.7
         Q2 -0.2-0.4-1.1
2.2-0.51.20.6
1.81.6-0.8
         Q3 0.10.1-2.7
3.60.21.61.1
2.61.8-0.5
2015 June -0.2-0.4-1.1
2.2-0.51.20.6
1.81.6-0.8
         July 0.20.1-0.5
2.5-0.21.30.8
2.01.6-0.7
         Aug. 0.20.20.0
2.5-0.41.41.0
2.71.6-0.5
         Sep. 0.10.1-2.7
3.60.21.61.1
2.61.8-0.5
         Oct. 0.50.6-2.3
5.10.41.71.2
2.82.0-0.4
         Nov. (p)0.90.90.0
3.50.51.91.4
3.52.1-0.1
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) In accordance with the ESA 2010, in December 2014 holding companies of non-financial groups were reclassified from the non-financial corporations sector to the financialcorporations sector. These entities are included in MFI balance sheet statistics with financial corporations other than MFIs and insurance corporations and pension funds (ICPFs).3) Including non-profit institutions serving households.
4) Adjusted for the derecognition of loans on the MFI balance sheet on account of their sale or securitisation.S 225 Money and creditS 22ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics5.5 Counterparts to M3 other than credit to euro area residents 1)(EUR billions and annual growth rates; seasonally adjusted; outstanding amounts and growth rates at end of period; transactions during period)Outstanding amounts         MFI liabilities   MFI assets      Central   Longer-term financial liabilities vis-à-vis other euro area residentsNet external
   Othergovernmentassets   holdings 2)TotalDepositsDepositsDebtCapital
   Totalwith anredeemablesecuritiesand reserves
agreedat noticewith a
ReposReverse
maturityof overmaturity
with centralrepos to
of over3 monthsof over
counter-central
2 years2 yearsparties 3)counter-parties 3)1234567891
02012305.77,577.22,394.1105.92,681.72,395.51,019.5170.3260.8201.2
2013261.77,311.02,371.291.52,507.22,341.11,146.5150.2183.8121.9
2014264.67,179.12,248.892.02,381.72,456.51,383.4217.5184.5139.7
2014 Q4 264.67,179.12,248.892.02,381.72,456.51,383.4217.5184.5139.7
2015 Q1 283.27,312.32,258.890.42,396.22,566.91,505.6232.0234.8159.1
         Q2 265.27,161.72,223.486.52,330.62,521.21,458.8234.6224.6143.7
         Q3 287.67,094.22,224.183.52,264.52,522.11,361.8248.8213.6140.8
2015 June 265.27,161.72,223.486.52,330.62,521.21,458.8234.6224.6143.7
         July 253.67,152.12,229.585.62,316.52,520.41,395.1235.1202.4137.4
         Aug. 274.57,118.32,225.184.22,289.82,519.21,355.3235.8207.0128.4
         Sep. 287.67,094.22,224.183.52,264.52,522.11,361.8248.8213.6140.8
         Oct. 347.87,107.22,207.682.22,256.82,560.71,394.5308.0196.4144.9
         Nov. (p)295.07,124.22,189.480.22,284.42,570.21,383.5270.4217.7146.0
Transactions2012-3.9-112.9-156.5-10.2-106.8160.692.342.59.441.5
2013-44.9-90.0-19.0-14.3-137.580.8362.0-62.532.243.7
2014-5.7-155.7-122.71.8-144.0109.1238.67.20.717.8
2014 Q4 10.3-81.5-28.91.0-62.28.625.0-3.820.918.0
2015 Q1 15.5-36.1-27.5-2.6-51.845.83.234.150.219.4
         Q2 -18.0-86.5-34.7-3.9-51.13.3-0.4-55.0-10.2-15.4
         Q3 22.0-37.46.1-3.1-58.418.0-63.81.6-11.0-2.9
2015 June -7.2-35.1-15.2-1.0-10.5-8.322.2-40.91.63.1
         July -11.7-4.89.8-0.9-20.16.5-51.89.1-22.2-6.4
         Aug. 20.8-14.3-2.7-1.4-13.33.1-19.4-16.24.6-9.0
         Sep. 12.8-18.3-1.0-0.7-25.08.37.48.86.612.4
         Oct. 58.0-35.0-23.6-1.3-18.07.89.351.3-17.24.1
         Nov. (p)-52.8-10.8-21.3-2.0-5.818.2-15.9-43.321.31.1
Growth rates2012-1.2-1.5-6.1-8.8-3.87.1
- - 2.526.1
2013-14.7-1.2-0.8-13.5-5.13.4
- - 10.323.3
2014-2.2-2.1-5.22.0-5.74.6
- - 0.414.6
2014 Q4 -2.2-2.1-5.22.0-5.74.6
- - 0.414.6
2015 Q1 5.5-2.6-5.9-0.3-6.54.7
- - 32.536.3
         Q2 -6.0-2.9-5.3-3.6-7.84.3
- - 31.020.7
         Q3 11.8-3.3-3.7-9.3-9.03.1
- - 30.515.7
2015 June -6.0-2.9-5.3-3.6-7.84.3
- - 31.020.7
         July -12.4-2.9-4.4-5.1-8.33.9
- - 19.213.6
         Aug. -1.4-3.1-4.3-8.0-8.43.6
- - 20.39.8
         Sep. 11.8-3.3-3.7-9.3-9.03.1
- - 30.515.7
         Oct. 29.6-3.4-4.2-10.1-8.83.0
- - 7.219.6
         Nov. (p)9.9-3.3-4.9-11.5-8.53.6
- - 18.011.7
Source: ECB.1) Data refer to the changing composition of the euro area.
2) Comprises central government holdings of deposits with the MFI sector and of securities issued by the MFI sector.
3) Not adjusted for seasonal effects.S 236 Fiscal developmentsS 23ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics6.1 Deficit/surplus(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)   Deficit (-)/surplus (+)Memo item:PrimaryTotalCentralStateLocalSocualdeficit (-)/governmentgovernmentgovernment
securitysurplus (+)funds123456
2011-4.2-3.3-0.7-0.20.0-1.22012-3.7-3.4-0.30.00.0-0.62013-3.0-2.6-0.20.0-0.1-0.22014-2.6-2.2-0.20.0-0.10.12014 Q3 -2.6. . . . 0.1
         Q4 -2.6. . . . 0.1
2015 Q1 -2.5. . . . 0.1
         Q2 -2.4. . . . 0.1
Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.6.2 Revenue and expenditure(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period)         Revenue   Expenditure      Total   Current revenueCapitalTotal
   Current expenditureCapitalrevenueexpenditureDirectIndirectNet social
Compen-IntermediateInterestSocial
taxestaxescontributions
sation ofconsumption
benefitsemployees1234
56789
1011
1213201144.944.511.612.615.10.449.144.810.4
5.33.022.2
4.3201246.145.612.212.915.30.449.745.210.4
5.43.022.6
4.5201346.646.112.512.915.50.549.645.510.4
5.42.823.0
4.1201446.846.312.513.115.50.549.445.410.3
5.32.723.1
3.92014 Q3 46.646.212.513.115.50.549.245.310.3
5.32.723.0
3.9         Q4 46.746.212.413.115.50.549.345.310.3
5.32.623.1
3.92015 Q1 46.646.112.513.115.50.549.145.210.3
5.32.523.1
3.9         Q2 46.546.112.513.115.40.548.945.110.2
5.32.523.1
3.8Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.6.3 Government debt-to-GDP ratio(as a percentage of GDP; outstanding amounts at end of period)               Total   Financial instrument
   Holder   Original maturity   Residual maturity
   CurrencyCurrencyLoansDebt   Resident creditorsNon-residentUp toOverUp toOver 1OverEuro orOther
andsecurities
creditors1 year1 year1 yearand up to5 yearsparticipatingcurren-
depositsMFIs5 yearscurrenciescies
123456
789101112
1314
201186.02.915.567.542.924.443.112.273.820.430.035.684.21.8
201289.33.017.468.945.526.243.811.478.019.731.737.987.22.2
201391.12.717.271.246.026.245.110.480.719.432.239.489.12.0
201492.12.717.072.445.326.046.810.182.019.032.141.090.12.0
2014 Q3 92.12.616.872.7. . . . . . . . . . 
         Q4 91.92.717.072.2. . . . . . . . . . 
2015 Q1 92.72.716.873.2. . . . . . . . . . 
         Q2 92.22.716.273.2. . . . . . . . . . 
Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.S 246 Fiscal developmentsS 24ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics6.4 Annual change in the government debt-to-GDP ratio and underlying factors 1)(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period):meti omeM-tseretnItnemtsujda tbed-ticifeD   yramirPni egnahCgniworroBhtworg   /)+( ticifed-ot-tbedGDP ratio 2)surplus (-)Total   Transactions in main financial assetsRevaluationOtherdifferentialrequirementeffectsTotalCurrencyLoansDebtEquity andand otherandsecuritiesinvestmentchanges inemulovserahs dnufstisoped12345678910111220112.11.20.2-0.40.2-0.2-0.2-0.10.40.20.83.920123.40.60.01.00.30.3-0.10.5-1.30.32.75.020131.70.2-0.3-0.6-0.5-0.4-0.10.3-0.10.41.92.720141.0-0.10.0-0.10.3-0.2-0.30.00.00.11.12.62014 Q3 1.0-0.1-0.1-0.10.00.1-0.20.1-0.30.31.22.8         Q4 1.0-0.10.0-0.10.3-0.1-0.30.0-0.10.21.12.72015 Q1 0.9-0.10.00.00.3-0.1-0.20.0-0.10.10.92.6         Q2 -0.5-0.1-0.9-0.9-0.3-0.3-0.2-0.20.00.10.51.5Sources: ECB for annual data; Eurostat for quarterly data.1) Intergovernmental lending in the context of the financial crisis is consolidated except in quarterly data on the deficit-deb
t adjustment.2) Calculated as the difference between the government debt-to-GDP ratios at the end of the reference period and a year earlier
.6.5 Government debt securities 1)(debt service as a percentage of GDP; flows during debt service period; average nominal yields in percentages per annum)   Debt service due within 1 year 2)sdleiy lanimon egarevA   egarevA  4)      laudiser      Total   Principal   Interestmaturity   Outstanding amounts   Transactionsin years 3)MaturitiesMaturitiesTotalFloatingZero   Fixed rateIssuanceRedemptionnopuocetar3 ot pu fo3 ot pu foseitirutaMshtnomshtnomof up to 1year12345678910111213201216.314.24.92.10.56.33.81.71.14.03.11.62.2201316.514.45.02.10.56.33.51.71.33.72.81.21.8201415.913.95.12.00.56.43.11.50.53.52.70.81.62014 Q3 17.315.25.72.10.56.43.21.50.53.52.80.91.6         Q4 15.913.95.12.00.56.43.11.50.53.52.70.81.62015 Q1 15.513.44.62.00.56.53.11.30.33.52.90.61.7         Q2 15.413.44.92.00.56.63.01.30.23.42.90.51.52015 July 15.313.34.32.00.56.62.91.30.13.42.90.41.6         Aug. 15.313.44.42.00.56.62.91.20.13.42.90.41.5         Sep. 15.513.54.42.00.56.62.91.20.13.33.00.41.4         Oct. 15.913.94.32.00.56.62.91.20.13.33.00.41.4         Nov. 16.014.04.72.00.56.52.91.20.13.33.00.41.4         Dec. 15.213.34.42.00.56.62.81.20.13.33.00.41.2Source: ECB.
1) At face value and not consolidated within the general government sector.
2) Excludes future payments on debt securities not yet outstanding and early redemptions.
3) Residual maturity at the end of the period.
4) Outstanding amounts at the end of the period; transactions as 12-month average.S 256 Fiscal developmentsS 25ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016 - Statistics6.6 Fiscal developments in euro area countries(as a percentage of GDP; flows during one-year period and outstanding amounts at end of period)Government deficit (-)/surplus (+)BelgiumGermanyEstoniaIrelandGreeceSpainFrance
ItalyCyprus
123456789
2011-4.1-1.01.2-12.5-10.2
-9.5-5.1-3.5-5.7
2012-4.1-0.1-0.3-8.0-8.8-10.4
-4.8-3.0-5.8
2013-2.9-0.1-0.1-5.7-12.4
-6.9-4.1-2.9-4.9
2014-3.10.30.7-3.9-3.6-5.9-3.9-3.0-8.9
2014 Q3 -3.00.1-0.1-4.6-2.3-5.8-4.0-2.7-10.2
         Q4 -3.10.30.7-3.9-3.5-5.9-3.9-3.0-8.8
2015 Q1 -3.30.40.5-3.6-4.3-5.9-3.9-3.0-0.2
         Q2 -3.10.60.6-3.0-4.5-5.4-4.1-2.9-0.4
Government debt2011102.278.45.9109.3172.0
69.585.2116.465.8
2012104.179.79.5120.2159.4
85.489.6123.279.3
2013105.177.49.9120.0177.0
93.792.3128.8102.5
2014106.774.910.4107.5178.6
99.395.6132.3108.2
2014 Q3 108.875.410.3112.6175.8
98.495.7132.3104.7
         Q4 106.774.910.4107.5177.1
99.395.6132.3107.5
2015 Q1 110.974.310.0104.7168.6
99.897.5135.3106.8
         Q2 109.372.59.9102.0167.8
99.597.7136.0109.7
Government deficit (-)/surplus (+)LatviaLithuaniaLuxembourgMaltaNetherlandsAustriaPortugalSloveniaSlovakiaFinland
10111213141516171819
2011-3.4-8.9
0.5-2.6-4.3-2.6-7.4-6.6-4.1-1.0
2012-0.8-3.1
0.2-3.6-3.9-2.2-5.7-4.1-4.2-2.1
2013-0.9-2.6
0.7-2.6-2.4-1.3-4.8-15.0-2.6-2.5
2014-1.5-0.7
1.4-2.1-2.4-2.7-7.2-5.0-2.8-3.3
2014 Q3 -1.0-0.7
1.3-2.8-2.8-1.1-7.4-12.8-2.9-3.0
         Q4 -1.6-0.7
1.4-2.1-2.4-2.7-7.2-5.0-2.8-3.3
2015 Q1 -1.8-0.8
1.0-2.5-2.0-2.2-7.1-4.8-2.8-3.3
         Q2 -1.90.30.8-2.2-1.9-2.2-6.4-4.7-2.9-2.8
Government debt201142.837.219.269.861.782.2111.446.443.348.5
201241.439.822.167.666.481.6126.253.751.952.9
201339.138.823.469.667.980.8129.070.854.655.6
201440.640.723.068.368.284.2130.280.853.559.3
2014 Q3 41.238.023.072.168.380.7132.377.955.657.9
         Q4 40.840.723.068.368.284.2130.280.853.759.3
2015 Q1 35.738.022.370.069.285.0130.481.854.260.3
         Q2 36.037.621.968.967.186.4128.780.854.562.4
Source: Eurostat.© European Central Bank, 2016Postal address 60640 Frankfurt am Main, GermanyTelephone +49 69 1344 0Website www.ecb.europa.eu
This Bulletin was produced under the responsibility of the Executive Board of the ECB. Translations are prepared and published by 
the national central banks.All rights reserved. Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. The cut-off date for the statistics included in this issue was 20 January 2016.

ISSN 2363-3417 (epub)ISSN 2363-3417 (online)EU catalogue No QB-BP-16-001-EN-E (epub)EU catalogue No QB-BP-16-001-EN-N (online)