ANNUAL REPORT 2000                                                            EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK
ENECB EZB EKT BCE EKPANNUAL
REPORT
2000ANNUAL
REPORT
2000©European Central Bank, 2001AddressKaiserstrasse 29
D-60311 Frankfurt am Main
GermanyPostal addressPostfach 16 03 19
D-60066 Frankfurt am Main
GermanyTelephone+49 69 1344 0

Internethttp://www.ecb.int
Fax+49 69 1344 6000
Telex411 144 ecb d
All rights reserved.Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
The cut-off date for the data included in this Report was 13 March 2001.ISSN 1561-4573IIIForeword2Chapter IEconomic developments and monetary policy
1Overview: monetary policy decisions in 2000
102Monetary and financial developments
152.1Monetary developments15
2.2Financial markets19
3Price developments
304Output, demand and labour market developments
365Fiscal developments
456The global macroeconomic environment, exchange rates and the
balance of payments49Chapter IICentral bank operations1Monetary policy implementation
581.1Overview58
1.2The main refinancing operations60

1.3The longer-term refinancing operations61
1.4Other open market operations62
1.5Standing facilities62

1.6The minimum reserve system63
1.7The Eurosystem™s eligible collateral and its use for credit operations64
1.8Participation of the Eurosystem™s counterparties in monetary policy operations65

1.9Money market activity65
2Payment and settlement systems operations
662.1The TARGET system66
2.2The correspondent central banking model68
3Foreign exchange operations and investment of foreign reserve assets
693.1Foreign exchange operations of the ECB69
3.2The foreign reserve assets of the Eurosystem69

3.3Developments in the Eurosystem™s approach to foreign reserve management70
4The ECB™s own funds management
71ContentsIV5Risk management
715.1Introduction71
5.2Investment operations71

5.3Monetary policy and payment systems operations72
5.4Current developments72
Chapter IIIEntry of Greece to the euro area
1Monetary, financial and economic developments in Greece
762Legal aspects of the integration of the Bank of Greece into the Eurosystem
793Operational aspects of the integration of the Bank of Greece
into the Eurosystem
813.1Monetary policy operations81

3.2Contribution to the ECB™s capital, reserves and foreign reserve assets82
Chapter IVEconomic developments in the other countries of the European Union
86Chapter VEuropean, international and bilateral issues1European issues
961.1The role of the Eurogroup97
1.2The Lisbon Special European Council on employment, economic reform
and social cohesion97
1.3Intergovernmental Conference98
2International issues
1002.1Institutional arrangements with international organisations100
2.2Multilateral and bilateral surveillance of macroeconomic policies101

2.3Monitoring of developments in global financial markets102
2.4The architecture of the international financial system103
3Bilateral issues
1053.1Relations with accession countries105
3.2Relations with other countries108
VChapter VIPayment and securities settlement systems
1General issues/introduction
1122Oversight of large-value payment systems
1133Oversight of retail payment systems
1144Other payment systems activities
1165Securities settlement systems policy
116Chapter VIIFinancial stability and prudential supervision
1Developments in the institutional framework for financial stability
1202Developments in the banking sector
1213Developments in the regulatory field
124Chapter VIIIProduction of the euro banknotes and coins and preparationsfor the cash changeover1Production of the euro banknotes and coins
1282Quality of the euro banknotes and coins
1282.1Quality of the banknotes128
2.2Quality of the coins128
3Protecting the euro banknotes and coins against counterfeiting
1284The Euro 2002 Information Campaign
1294.1The Mass Media Campaign129
4.2PR and press activities129

4.3The Partnership Programme130
4.4Other elements130
5Changeover to the euro banknotes and coins in 2002
1305.1Financial modalities for the 2002 cash changeover130
5.2Cash changeover in markets outside the euro area132

5.3Duration of the dual circulation period133
5.4Exchange of national banknotes at national central banks133
5.5Adaptation of ATMs, currency sorting and accepting machines134
VIChapter IXDevelopment of the statistical framework

1Introduction
1382Money and banking statistics and statistics on financial markets
1383Balance of payments, international reserves and international investment
position statistics, and effective exchange rates
1394Financial accounts
1405Government finance statistics
1406General economic statistics
1417Co-operation with the European Commission and international
institutions1418Statistics relating to non-participating Member States and accession
countries141Chapter XOther tasks and activities
1Advisory functions
1442Compliance with the prohibitions on monetary financing and privileged
access1463The administration of the borrowing and lending operations
by the European Community146Chapter XIExternal communication and accountability1The ECB™s communication policy and activities
1501.1Communication policy objectives150
1.2Communication activities151
2The exchange of information and views with the European Parliament
1522.1Relations between the ECB and the European Parliament152
2.2Views of the ECB on selected topics raised at meetings with the
European Parliament153
VIIChapter XIIThe institutional framework of the Eurosystem and theEuropean System of Central Banks1The Eurosystem and the European System of Central Banks
1582The decision-making bodies of the ECB
1592.1The Governing Council159

2.2The Executive Board161
2.3The General Council162
3The organisation of the ECB
1643.1Corporate governance164
3.2Human resources management165

3.3The organisational chart of the ECB167
4ESCB Committees
168Chapter XIIIAnnual Accounts of the ECB and Consolidated Balance Sheet of theEurosystem 2000Balance Sheet as at 31 December 2000172Profit and Loss Account for the year ending 31 December 2000
174Accounting policies175Notes on the Balance Sheet179Notes on the Profit and Loss Account184Audit report186Note on profit distribution187Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Eurosystem as at 31 December 2000188AnnexesGlossary192Chronology205
Documents published by the European Central Bank (ECB)209VIIIList of Boxes, Tables and ChartsBoxes
1The publication of Eurosystem staff economic projections by the ECB11
2Global stock market volatility increased driven by high-technology stock markets28
Charts:Historical and implied stock market volatility29
3Price effects of regulatory reforms in euro area network industries33
Chart:Price level relative to the overall HICP in the euro area34
4The main characteristics of GDP growth in the euro area in recent years37
Table:Contribution of domestic demand and net trade to GDP growth
in the euro area38
5The decline in unemployment from a longer-term perspective43
Table:Standardised unemployment rates in the euro area43
6Population ageing and the need for pension reform in the euro area48

7Statistical implications of the enlargement of the euro area to include Greece78
8Inflation differentials between the non-participating EU countries and the euro area91
Chart:Inflation indicators relative to the euro area91
9Relevant provisions of the Treaty of Nice99
10Revision of the SDR valuation and interest rate baskets by the IMF101
11Main conclusions emerging from the Vienna Seminar108

12Consultation procedures in 2000144
13Public appearances of ECB representatives before the European Parliament in 2000152
Tables1Price and cost developments in the euro area30
2Composition of real GDP growth in the euro area37
3Industrial production in the euro area41

4Labour market developments in the euro area42
5Fiscal positions in the euro area46
6Payment traffic in TARGET66

7Peak traffic in TARGET in 200066
8Macroeconomic indicators for Greece77
9Macroeconomic indicators for Denmark87

10Macroeconomic indicators for Sweden89
11Macroeconomic indicators for the United Kingdom90
12Currency weights in the SDR valuation basket100

13Domestic and cross-border on-balance-sheet activities of euro area OMFIs123
14Number of euro banknotes to be produced by 1 January 2002134
IXCharts1ECB interest rates and money market rates14
2M3 growth and the reference value15

3Components of M316
4Sectoral breakdown of loans by MFIs18
5Amounts outstanding of euro-denominated debt securities issued
by euro area residents19
6Short-term interest rates in the euro area21
7(a)Long-term government bond yields in the euro area, the United States and Japan23

7(b)Ten-year interest rate differential of the United States against the euro area23
8Break-even inflation rate calculated for the French CPI24
9Short-term retail bank interest rates and a comparable market rate25

10Long-term retail bank interest rates and a comparable market rate26
11Stock price indices in the euro area, the United States and Japan27
12Breakdown of HICP inflation in the euro area by components31

13Consumer, producer and import prices in the euro area35
14Contributions to quarterly real GDP growth in the euro area36
15Unemployment in the euro area45

16Main developments in major industrialised economies52
17Nominal effective exchange rate53
18Liquidity factors and the use of standing facilities in the euro area in 200059

19Total bid amount and allotment ratio in 200060
20Developments in cross-border collateral as a percentage of total collateral provided
to the Eurosystem68
21Co-operation activities between the ECB and the central banks of accession
countries107XAbbreviationsCountriesBEBelgium
DKDenmark

DEGermany
GRGreece
ESSpain

FRFrance
IEIreland
ITItaly

LULuxembourg
NLNetherlands
ATAustria

PTPortugal
FIFinland
SESweden

UKUnited Kingdom
JPJapan
USUnited States
OthersBISBank for International Settlements
BPM4IMF Balance of Payments Manual (4th edition)

BPM5IMF Balance of Payments Manual (5th edition)
CDscertificates of deposit
c.i.f.cost, insurance and freight at the importer™s border

CPIConsumer Price Index
ECBEuropean Central Bank
ECUEuropean Currency Unit

EMIEuropean Monetary Institute
ESA 95European System of Accounts 1995
ESCBEuropean System of Central Banks

EUEuropean Union
EUReuro
f.o.b.free on board at the exporter™s border

GDPgross domestic product
HICPHarmonised Index of Consumer Prices
ILOInternational Labour Organization

IMFInternational Monetary Fund
MFIsMonetary Financial Institutions
NCBsnational central banks

reposrepurchase agreements
SITC Rev. 3Standard International Trade Classification (revision 3)
In accordance with Community practice, the EU countries are listed in this Reportusing the alphabetical order of the country names in the national languages.XIOn the 14 dividing pages between the chapters of this Annual Report you will find picturesof colourful euro coins. They were painted under the patronage of the President of theECB in the framework of a project entitled ﬁEuro-World: European painting for young
cancer patientsﬂ. Children and teenagers throughout the European Union together with
artists devoted their efforts and imagination to painting about 1,000 huge euro coins whichdecorated the streets of Frankfurt for many months of 2000. Some of the coins will be on
display in other European cities in the course of this year. The ECB purchased a total of 14
of the euro coins. Two pieces will remain at the ECB, but the remaining 12 Œ which werepainted by young cancer patients from the 12 euro area countries Œ will be returned as a
donation from the ECB to the hospitals of the children involved in the paintings. The ECB ishappy to have contributed in this manner to the charitable aims of the Euro-World project.Vesaliusinstituut KTA Oostende, BelgiumXIIDesigned by Jacky De Mayer. Title: Euro™s Spring
Universitätsklinik Frankfurt am Main, Germany
8Designed by Ferry Ahrlé. Title: Europe follow meHospital Infantil Virgen del Rocío, Niños Ud. Oncología Pediátrica,56Seville, Spain
Designed by children at the hospital. UntitledGreece74Designed by Marios Spilopoulos. UntitledLes enfants de l™unité de pédiatrie de l™Institut Gustave Roussy84et le Rire Médecin, France
Designed by Marine, Hugues, Tiphaine, Romain, Christine, Farid, Guillaume,Founé, Christelle, Magalie, Adel and Si-Amed. UntitledOur Lady™s Hospital for Sick Children, Ireland94Designed by Eamonn Coleman. UntitledClinica Pediatrica Ospedale ﬁ S. Gerardoﬂ, Italy110Designed by Pedrotti Riccardo and Francesca Zavanone. UntitledMitarbeiterkinder der Luxair S.A., Luxembourg118Designed by Paule Lemmer. Title: Tracing the EURO
VU Œ Ziekenhuis, Kinderkliniek Amsterdam, the Netherlands126UntitledSir-Karl-Popper-Schule, Vienna, Austria
136Designed by Christian Ludwig Attersee. UntitledJardim de Infância de Gueifães, n°1 Œ Maia, Portugal
142Designed by Emerenciano, Inês, Ricardo, Maria and Ana. Title: All togetherHelsinki Art School for Young People, Finland146Designed by Annu Martikainen. Title: Colours playing alongAcadémie du Westhoek, Koksijde, Belgium156Designed by Chantal Grard. Title: Euro 2000 Œ UnityKinderkrebsstation der Klinik Innsbruck, Austria170Designed by Marie Luise Klimbacher. Untitled
Vesaliusinstituut KTA Oostende,Belgium
Designed by Jacky De Mayer.Title:EuroÕs Spring 
Foreword2The euro has been in existence for two years.In 1999 price increases were very low in theeuro area. Last year, inflation slightly exceeded
the ceiling of 2% considered by the EuropeanCentral Bank (ECB) to be compatible with pricestability in the medium term.The increase in inflation last year was mainly
due to external influences. Oil prices rose
rapidly, while the euro depreciated againstmajor currencies. As these developmentstook place in a climate of strong economic
growth, they could have had implications forprice stability in the medium term. As aconsequence, there were upward risks to
price stability for the greater part of 2000.These were also indicated by monetarydevelopments. Money growth remained well

above the reference value of 4½% throughoutmost of 2000.In order to maintain the prospects for stableprices in the medium term, the Governing
Council of the ECB decided to raise the key
interest rates six times in the course of lastyear. Towards the end of the year, the risksto price stability became more balanced.
Money growth gradually declined andapproached the reference value. Oil pricesfell. The exchange rate of the euro recovered
from the lows it had registered in October.Signs that the economy of the United Stateswas slowing down became clearer. Economic
growth in the euro area remained robust,but declined somewhat from the high levelsseen in the earlier part of the year. However,
in late 2000 and early 2001 there were stillsome elements of upward risks to pricestability. These were related to wage

prospects, fiscal policy and the lagged pass-
through of both past increases in oil pricesand the past depreciation of the euro.Looking back at the first two years of theeuro, there is reason to repeat the favourable
conclusions I drew in last year™s AnnualReport. Inflation has remained relatively low,particularly considering the strong increase
in oil prices. Financial markets have shownconfidence in the determination and ability
of the ECB to maintain price stability, its
primary objective, in the medium and longerterm. This is clear from the level of long-
term interest rates, which shows that

markets expect price stability to bemaintained in the euro area. The ECB hasalready built up considerable credibility.The introduction of the euro has added
impetus to the process of change in the
financial sector and the euro area economyas a whole. Indeed, the euro area as a singleeconomic entity has started to become a

more familiar notion. This is crucial to anunderstanding of the ECB™s monetary policy,
which always has to be directed at maintaining

price stability in the whole of the euro area.Financial markets in the euro area havecontinued to integrate, and the consolidation
of the financial sector has been boosted
by the introduction of the euro. The twoprocesses are related and are not yet complete.

This is also clear from the EuropeanCommission™s Financial Services Action Planand the report prepared by the Committee
of Wise Men on the regulation of Europeansecurities markets.The euro was introduced in a favourableeconomic climate, and contributed to it. Lastyear, economic growth in the euro area3(3.4%) was the strongest for a decade. It hadalready increased in 1999, after only a slightslowdown following the Asian and Russian
crises. Many new jobs were created andunemployment declined almost continuously.Nonetheless, unemployment remained
unacceptably high both on average in the euro
area and in some countries in particular.
It is widely acknowledged that unemploymentin the euro area is highly structural in nature.It is, therefore, gratifying to note that over
the past two years structural reforms to make
product and labour markets operate
more flexibly have been put firmly on the
agenda. What is even more important is thatfar-reaching measures are taken and are being
implemented in a consistent fashion.The fiscal position of countries in the euroarea is far healthier than just a few years ago.

It is fair to say, however, that the recentdecline in fiscal deficits has been more theresult of low interest rates and stronger
than expected growth than of measures toimprove fiscal balances. It is important thatcountries make further progress along the

path of consolidation to meet the requirementsof the Stability and Growth Pact. The
favourable economic developments in the
euro area were facilitated by the fiscalconsolidation already achieved, as well as bymoderate wage developments, structural
reforms and stable prices. These achievements,if sustained, should enhance Europe™sgrowth potential and foster a reduction in
unemployment in the years to come. The firsttwo years of the euro have also shown that thepolicy-making framework at the European level
is satisfactory. No major flaws emerged, as hadbeen feared by some. It is crucial that thisframework be adhered to as agreed. This is not
to deny that it will be possible for further
improvements to be made on the basis ofexperience, if and when appropriate.A great deal remains to be done, but much
has already been achieved. One fact to be
highlighted, however, is that the generalpublic has not always perceived the positiveoverall balance of the euro™s first two years.This is not the place to analyse this gapbetween perception and reality in detail. It
may even be impossible to find a full
explanation for this phenomenon. However,the fact that the euro is new and, due to the
absence of euro banknotes and coins, not yetvery ﬁvisibleﬂ or ﬁconcreteﬂ has probablyplayed an important role.In any event, too much attention Œparticularly among the general public Œ was

drawn to the depreciation of the euro.Although the euro area is a relatively closedeconomy, this depreciation added to the

upward risks to price stability (as mentionedabove), as a result of its persistence and itsmagnitude. The exchange rate was clearly no
longer in line with the strong fundamentals of
the euro area. This situation and the attentionthe exchange rate received in the media also
tended to affect the confidence of the general
public in the euro.The concern about the potential implicationsof developments in the euro exchange rate
for the world economy, as shared by our
partners in the G7, ultimately prompted
interventions in the foreign exchange markets,together with its G7 partners on the initiative

of the ECB in September and then unilaterallyby the Eurosystem in November. At the end oflast year the euro started to recover.The perception of the euro and thediscussion about the exchange rate in 1999
and 2000 are practical and concrete examples
of something which we have always known inthe abstract: anchoring confidence in the
euro, in particular for the general public, is a
time-consuming process. The best way inwhich to do it is to build up a track record

of low inflation and to demonstrate thedetermination with which the ECB pursues
its objective of maintaining price stability. A
good start has been made in establishing this
track record, but this, by definition, takestime. Since price stability can never be taken
for granted, this will be the main challengefor the Eurosystem in the years to come.4As I have said, a major handicap in makingEuropean citizens aware of their newcurrency is the fact that euro banknotes and

coins will not be introduced until next year.
This shows how significant the event will be.This year, the preparations for the launch of
the euro banknotes and coins will becompleted. Their introduction will coincidewith the changeover of all accounting systems

to the euro. This highlights the fact 
thateverybody has to be seriously prepared for thefinal stage of the changeover to the euro.This Annual Report summarises the activitiesof the European System of Central Banks
(ESCB) and the Eurosystem in 2000. It alsoreports on monetary policy last year and thisyear. The report highlights the many issues,
sometimes of a technical nature, that havebeen resolved and are being resolved inestablishing the Eurosystem as the central
bank of the euro area. Although many aredirectly or indirectly related to monetarypolicy, the report also deals with the other
activities of the Eurosystem. Here I can onlytouch on a selection. A full account can be
found in the 13 chapters of the report.Monetary policy decisions of the Governing
Council of the ECB continued to be focused

on the overriding objective of preservingprice stability in the medium term (see
Chapter I). The ECB™s monetary policy was

based, as in the past, on its two-pillar strategy.
With regard to the second pillar, last year
the ECB started to publish Eurosystem staff
economic projections. This should be seen inthe context of the ECB™s policy of being asopen and transparent as possible; it did not

imply any change in the monetary policystrategy of the ECB. In the context of the
first pillar of the strategy, the Governing
Council reconfirmed the 4½% reference valuefor the annual growth of the money supply,arguing that the underlying determinants of
this reference value had not changed.However, it concluded that the uncertaintyregarding potential economic growth in the
euro area in the medium term was skewed tothe upside. Although there are no clear signsas yet of an increase in potential growth inthe euro area due to the emergence of theﬁNew Economyﬂ, there are some indicationsat the micro level that this may change in the
future.The Eurosystem™s operational framework
continued to function smoothly (see
Chapter II). The only exception was the gradualdevelopment of a problem of severe
overbidding by credit institutions in the mainrefinancing operations. This prompted theEurosystem to switch from a fixed rate tender

to a variable rate tender procedure with aminimum bid rate. It was explained that in the
new procedure the minimum bid rate signalled
the monetary policy stance, as the fixed ratehad done previously. No change in themonetary policy stance was intended with the
move to the new allotment procedure.
Experience with the new tender procedure hasbeen very good.This year, Greece was welcomed as the twelfthcountry of the euro area (see Chapter III).
This was decided on the basis of the
convergence it had achieved with the euro area.
As required, the ECB published a convergence

report in 2000, and a number of technical
preparations for Greece™s entry had to be madein the course of the year. It should also be
mentioned that, after a referendum, Denmarkdecided not to apply for adoption of the euro.
This did not imply any change in the relationship
between the ECB and Danmarks Nationalbank.Denmark continued to be a member of ERM II,
maintaining a narrow fluctuation band for the
Danish krone against the euro (see Chapter IV).Last year the Eurosystem continued to buildup its role in international co-operation(see Chapter V). This had many dimensions.First, the ECB continued to maintain and
develop relations with the institutions andbodies of the European Community. Second,the Eurosystem again engaged in international
co-operation on monetary, economic andfinancial matters. It took a particular interestin the work on international financial market
developments conducted in internationalorganisations and fora. Third, the ECBcontinued to deepen its working relations
5with many central banks outside the EuropeanUnion (EU). The Eurosystem intensified itsdialogue with the central banks of the
accession countries. The ECB also developedrelations with the central banks of Europeancountries not in the accession process, of
key emerging market economies and of
certain other industrial countries.In June 2000 the ECB published a statementin which it clarified the role of theEurosystem in the field of payment systems
oversight (see Chapter VI). Promoting thesmooth functioning of payment systems is acore function of a central bank, one which is

directly linked to its responsibility formonetary policy and financial stability.In 1999 the Eurosystem formulated a number
of objectives to improve the speed and lowerthe costs of cross-border retail payment

services in the euro area (see Chapter VI). Lastyear, the Eurosystem assessed the progressmade against these objectives and identified
the outstanding issues. It was concluded thatthe banking and payment systems industry hascommitted itself to the fulfilment of the
objectives. Progress has been made inpreparing the ground for a more efficienthandling of cross-border retail credit transfers.
Nevertheless, the Eurosystem has also identifiedsome unresolved issues and suggested solutions.It will continue to monitor closely the activities
of the banking sector and the progress madealong the road towards fulfilling the objectives,in order to ensure that the preparations
ultimately translate into satisfactory services for
European citizens.The Eurosystem is continuing to follow
developments in electronic money andtheir implications for central banks (see

Chapter VI). In 2000 it actively co-operated
with the European authorities on a newregulatory framework for electronic money
institutions. This framework was adoptedand largely addresses the ECB™s concernsas regards monetary policy, prudential

supervision and payment systems.Close co-operation between paymentsystems overseers and banking supervisorshelps to form an overall strategy of risk

reduction in the financial system, and is thusessential (see Chapters VI and VII). The ECBand the national central banks (NCBs) of the

ESCB, in their capacity as overseers ofpayment systems, and the banking supervisory
authorities of the EU countries have agreed
on a ﬁMemorandum of Understandingﬂ. Itfocuses on an exchange of informationbetween payment systems overseers and
banking supervisors in relation to large-valueinterbank funds transfer systems, in order toensure the soundness and stability of such
systems and their participants.The increasing integration of banking andfinancial activities in the euro area and theEU led the EU authorities in the course of
2000 to review the institutional arrangements

and the regulatory framework designed tosafeguard financial stability (see Chapter VII).The ﬁReport on financial stabilityﬂ concluded
that the existing institutional arrangementsprovide a coherent and flexible basis forsafeguarding financial stability, but that their
operational functioning needs someenhancement. The ECB supports the stancetaken in the report. The Eurosystem has a
general interest in the move towardsintegrated securities markets. However, thetasks of the Eurosystem with regard to

payment systems, prudential supervision andfinancial stability give it an even stronger
incentive to monitor and assess relevant
developments in the securities marketinfrastructure and regulatory framework.Consequently, the ECB actively participated
in the consultation process initiated by theCommittee of Wise Men on the regulation ofEuropean securities markets. The proposals

put forward by the Committee for achievinga more flexible and effective regulatoryprocess at the EU level are broadly supported
by the ECB.With the assistance of the BankingSupervision Committee, the tools forthe analysis of the banking sector havebeen sharpened in order to provide a6comprehensive framework for monitoringsystemic risk at the EU/euro area level. Inaddition, the analysis of major structural
developments in the banking and financial
sector has been enhanced (see Chapter VII).As part of the preparations for theintroduction of the euro banknotes and coins,the ECB and the 12 NCBs of the Eurosystem
are conducting the Euro 2002 InformationCampaign (see Chapter VIII). Its slogan isﬁthe EURO. OUR moneyﬂ
. The campaign isbeing implemented at the international levelby the ECB and at the national level by the
12 NCBs of the Eurosystem. The campaign is
being co-ordinated with similar campaignsprepared by national authorities. It focuses
on four main messages:the appearance of the banknotes and coins,
the authentication features,the denominations andhow the changeover will take place.Three principal channels are being used todeliver these messages: a mass mediacampaign, information material for the public
and the press, and co-operation with othergroups active in this area (the PartnershipProgramme).The Governing Council has agreed on thegeneral principles of the framework for the

2002 cash changeover (see Chapter VIII). Inderiving these principles, due account wastaken of the major role credit institutions
will play in making the cash changeover asuccessful operation. The decisions taken
relate to the following matters: the

frontloading and sub-frontloading ofbanknotes, the debiting model and thecoverage of risks.In 2000 the statistical work of the ECBfocused on ensuring that the information
needed to support the functions of theEurosystem continued to be received,processed, disseminated and published in atimely manner, to a high standard of quality
and with good supporting documentation (seeChapter IX). This work was carried out in

close co-operation with the NCBs, whichcollect data from reporting agents
and compile the national statistics necessary

to construct euro area aggregates. Althoughthere is no reason to doubt that sufficientinformation is available for sound monetary
policy decisions, it is also true that there is
room for improvement. This applies first
and foremost to economic statistics. It is

particularly important for statistics to be
available for all euro area countries and forthe national data to be adequately
harmonised. Responsibility for these statisticsat the EU level lies mainly with the EuropeanCommission (Eurostat). The ECB and the

Commission have collaborated closely toestablish an Action Plan identifying the fieldswhere urgent progress is needed for each
Member State and for each statistical area.
The areas mentioned as most needingimprovement include quarterly national
accounts, quarterly public finance statistics,labour market statistics, a range of short-term business indicators and external trade
statistics.The ECB must be consulted by the relevantCommunity institution and the responsiblenational authorities, as appropriate, on anyproposed Community or national legislation
which falls within the ECB™s field ofcompetence (see Chapter X). A total of32 consultations were initiated in 2000. Three
were related to the adoption of the euro byGreece. Four involved the introduction of
the euro banknotes and coins in 2002 and
seven involved Community legal acts. Theremaining consultations related to nationallegislative proposals.During 2000 the members of the ExecutiveBoard of the ECB, and the President in
particular, continued their appearances beforethe European Parliament to report on monetarypolicy and other activities of the ESCB (see

Chapter XI). In line with agreed practice, Iappeared before the Committee on Economicand Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament
7each quarter. The focus of these testimonieswas on monetary policy and economicdevelopments, in particular the factors
potentially affecting price stability. I reportedon the decisions taken by the Governing Councilin the area of monetary policy as well as in
other fields of ESCB competence, and explainedthe analysis underpinning these decisions indetail. In addition, other members of the
Executive Board appeared before thisCommittee on a number of other occasions.
Our regular appearances before the European
Parliament are an essential tool to providethe European public and their directlyelected representatives with comprehensive
explanations of the way the ECB and theEurosystem fulfil their mandate.
In addition to the decision-making bodies ofthe ECB (the Executive Board, the GoverningCouncil and the General Council), the
corporate governance of the ESCB alsoencompasses external layers of checks and
balances (see Chapter XII). The Statute of
the ESCB provides for two layers, namely theexternal auditors and the European Court ofAuditors. More recently, an independent
Anti-Fraud Committee was established as anadditional check. It should be noted that an
internal monitoring structure also exists,
involving Œ among other things Œ internal
auditing on a continuous basis under amandate from the Executive Board. In

October last year the Executive Boardapproved the Code of Conduct of the
European Central Bank. The Code of

Conduct gives guidance to, and setsbenchmarks for, the staff of the ECB and the
members of the Executive Board. They are
encouraged to maintain high standards ofprofessional ethics in the performance oftheir duties at the ECB as well as in their
relations with NCBs, public authorities,market participants, media representatives
and the public in general. The ExecutiveBoard also adopted detailed rules preventingthe abuse of sensitive financial market
information (ﬁinsider trading rulesﬂ and
ﬁChinese wallsﬂ).At the end of 2000 the number of staff
employed by the ECB from all 15 MemberStates stood at 941 (see Chapter XII). Thiscompares with 732 staff at the end of 1999.

The ECB™s budget for 2001 envisagesincreasing the number to slightly over 1,100in the course of the year.Last year, the ECB made an operating profitof 4.6 billion, before the deduction ofspecial provisions of 2.6 billion to coverexchange and interest rate risks (seeChapter XIII). The profit made in the context
of the ECB™s interventions in the foreignexchange markets was a significant elementof this result.One of the advantages of the single currency isthat the euro area is probably less vulnerable
than in the past to economic disturbanceselsewhere. There is good reason for realisticoptimism regarding the prospects of the euro
area economy. This will not only benefit theeuro area itself: that the euro area is showing ahealthy economic development, solving its
unemployment problem step by step, furtherimproving the structure of its economy andmaintaining an internally stable currency is also
a source of stability for the world economy.Frankfurt am Main, March 2001
Willem F. DuisenbergUniversit−tsklinik Frankfurt am Main,Germany
Designed by Ferry Ahrl”.Title:Europe follow me
Chapter IEconomic developmentsand monetary policy101Overview: monetary policy decisions in 2000
The primary objective of the single monetarypolicy is to maintain price stability in theeuro area. In late 1998 the Governing Council
of the ECB defined price stability as ﬁyear-
on-year increases in the HICP for the euro
area of below 2%ﬂ. Furthermore, it was made
clear from the outset that ﬁprice stability is
to be maintained in the medium termﬂ. In
taking monetary policy decisions, theGoverning Council continued in 2000 to

organise its analysis of information on theeconomic situation and threats to pricestability in accordance with the two ﬁpillarsﬂ
of its monetary policy strategy.The first pillar of the strategy assigns a
prominent role to money, reflecting thefundamentally monetary origins of inflationover the medium to longer term. Within the

first pillar, M3 developments are assessed inrelation to a reference value. This referencevalue is the annual growth rate of M3 which
is consistent with, and best serves, themaintenance of price stability in the euro
area in the medium term. The reference value
was set at 4½% in December 1998 and it wasconfirmed by the Governing Council inDecember 1999.The second pillar of the strategy encompassesa wide range of other economic and financial
variables in order to come to a broadly based
assessment of the outlook for pricedevelopments and the risks to price stability
in the euro area. Within this pillar, internal
macroeconomic projections based both onconventional models and on economic
experts™ knowledge, as well as forecastsproduced outside the Eurosystem, play a roleas tools for summarising existing information
relevant for assessing possible futuredevelopments. In November 2000, the
Governing Council decided to publish, as
from December 2000 with biannualfrequency, the Eurosystem staff economicprojections for the euro area (see Box 1 for
a description of the publication of projectionsand their role in the monetary policy strategyof the ECB).2000 was a year of sound economic growthin the euro area which reached, at 3.4%, itshighest level for more than a decade. At thesame time, mainly as a result of adverse
influences from oil prices and the exchangerate of the euro, short-term price pressuresrose in 2000, driving the average inflation
rate in the year to 2.4%. The intensity of
these short-term price pressures posed risksto price stability in the medium term, through

possible indirect and second round effects onconsumer price inflation, especially in acontext of strong economic growth and a
high degree of capacity utilisation. The growth
rate of M3 remained above the referencevalue throughout the year. The Governing
Council of the ECB reacted to these medium-term price pressures by raising interest ratessix times (see Chart 1), thus contributing to

maintaining a favourable outlook for pricestability over the medium term.
At the outset of 2000, the interest rates onthe three main monetary policy instrumentswere those prevailing since 4 November
1999, when the Governing Council haddecided to increase the key ECB interestrates by 50 basis points. On that occasion,

the rate on the main refinancing operationsof the Eurosystem was raised to 3%, whilethe rates on the marginal lending and deposit

facilities were increased to 4% and 2%respectively. In November 1999, the reasonsunderlying the precautionary interest rate
reduction of April 1999 no longer prevailed.The information coming from the evolutionof monetary aggregates, financial markets and

other economic indicators was indicating thatdownward risks to price stability had recededand that risks to price stability were shifting
to the upside.
In the first half of 2000, the information
stemming from the first pillar of the strategycontinued to point towards upward risks toprice stability. The three-month average of
annual M3 growth remained at around 6%,
significantly above the reference value of4½%, almost continuously throughout the
11Box 1The publication of Eurosystem staff economic projections by the ECBEconomic projections offer a convenient analytical tool for organising and summarising a large amount ofinformation and help to create a consistent picture of possible future developments. For this reason, projections
are a useful guidepost for starting discussions on future economic developments.From the start of Stage Three, economic projections have been prepared by Eurosystem staff as one of anumber of inputs into the deliberations of the Governing Council. In the December 2000 issue of the ECB
Monthly Bulletin, the ECB published these staff projections for the first time. These projections, which areproduced within the Eurosystem on a biannual basis, will henceforth be published in the June and Decemberissues of the ECB Monthly Bulletin. Projected figures are published for HICP inflation and the growth rate of
real GDP and its components and they are accompanied by a text describing their main features. Theseprojections have a two-year horizon. In order to reflect the degree of uncertainty attached to such projectionexercises, the projections are published in the form of ranges.The decision to publish the staff projections reflects the Governing Council™s conviction that the informationand analysis underlying its monetary policy decisions should be shared with the public, to the extent possible
and efficient. However, in order to assess appropriately the role of the staff projections in the monetary policydecision-making process, the nature and the limitations of projections need to be well understood.In this respect, the Eurosystem uses the term ﬁprojectionﬂ (rather than ﬁforecastﬂ) in order to signal that thepublished figures are the results of a scenario based on a set of underlying technical assumptions, including, inparticular, the assumption of ﬁunchanged monetary policyﬂ, which implies a constant level of short-term
interest rates over the forecasting horizon. This means that possible future monetary policy responses toemerging threats to price stability are not incorporated. Because of these underlying assumptions, the staffeconomic projections are not, in general, the best predictors of future outcomes, especially at longer horizons.The Eurosystem staff economic projections are based on econometric models and on economic experts™knowledge. They form part of the second pillar, as such projections (as well as the forecasts made by most
other institutions) are produced using analytical frameworks which do not accord a prominent role to money,but focus on the interplay between demand and supply and/or cost pressures. In addition, it is important to seethat the projections do not, by their nature, incorporate all the analyses conducted under the second pillar. In
particular, the econometric models underlying projections, like any model of the economy, are subject touncertainty and cannot provide a complete description of the economy. Furthermore, the process of preparingprojections is time-consuming, implying that certain assumptions underlying the projections can become
quickly outdated. Finally, in assessing the potential risk to price stability, it is often necessary to look beyond
the time horizon for which reliable projections can typically be formulated, i.e. one to two years. For all thesereasons, the Governing Council does not only rely on projections in its monetary policy considerations. It also
analyses monetary developments under the first pillar of its strategy and looks at information other thanprojections under the second pillar (such as recent data not taken into account in the projections, forecastsproduced outside the Eurosystem, financial market indicators providing forward-looking information, etc.).
A thorough assessment and cross-checking of the information coming from various indicators and differentanalytical frameworks are essential features of the ECB™s two pillar strategy. This also helps the GoverningCouncil in assessing the importance of the various indicators and in identifying the nature of economic
disturbances affecting the euro area economy which have implications for price developments.The above arguments explain why the staff projections have an important but limited role in the discussions ofthe Governing Council. The Governing Council only uses the projections as an input into its deliberations and
does not assume responsibility for the projections. Since the assessment of the Governing Council draws on a12broader range of analyses than the staff projections alone, one should not expect monetary policy decisions torespond mechanically to developments in the economic projections published by the ECB.Given its overriding commitment to maintain price stability, the Governing Council™s own best prediction forprice developments over the medium term must always be consistent with its quantitative definition of pricestability. This definition should anchor inflation expectations. Against this background, the publishedmacroeconomic projections for inflation should not, under any circumstances, be seen as questioning the
commitment of the Governing Council to maintain price stability over the medium term. Furthermore,
projections have been produced by staff and presented to the Governing Council since the beginning of StageThree. Neither the ECB™s strategy in general, nor the role of the staff projections within it in particular, has
been changed by the publication of projections.
first half of 2000, with a peak of 6.4% in April2000 (see Section 2.1 in this chapter). The
protracted upward deviation of M3 growthfrom the reference value of 4½% in 2000,
which followed a period in which M3 growth

had been close to 6% for several months in
1999, implied that abundant liquidity had beenprogressively accumulated in 1999 and the
first half of 2000. Furthermore, the highgrowth of M3 in 1999 and in the first half of2000 continued to be associated with rates
of growth in M1 of around 10%. In addition,
credit to the private sector continued toexpand at rates of around 10%.The information stemming from the second
pillar in the first half of 2000 also increasingly
pointed towards risks to price stability. Oil
prices continued to rise, as different events ledto gradual upward pressures, especially in the

second quarter of 2000, and the exchange rateof the euro depreciated further until thebeginning of May. Inflation, as measured by the
increase in the Harmonised Index of ConsumerPrices (HICP), rose and remained close to 2%throughout much of the first half of 2000. In
addition, the rise in import prices increasedproduction costs, with possible indirect effectsthat would be likely to materialise in the rate of
increase in the HICP with a lag. Furthermore, in
a more medium-term perspective, theseprolonged upward pressures from energy prices
also led to risks of second-round effects viawage increases. This risk was especiallypronounced in an environment of robust
economic growth and tight labour marketconditions in some sectors. In fact, data on the
growth of real gross domestic product (GDP)and other indicators, including industrialproduction figures and surveys on industrial and
consumer confidence, indicated that economicactivity had expanded very rapidly in early 2000and was set to continue along that path. The

external environment was also growth-supportive. Recovery continued in East Asia andLatin America, while growth in the United States
was very strong. Forecasts for economic activityin the euro area were repeatedly revisedupwards, supported by data and surveys on
developments in economic activity and by the
continuous brightening of the internationalenvironment.Overall, high monetary and credit growth, aprolonged phase of depreciation of the
exchange rate and the strong oil priceincreases added, in a period of strong
economic growth, to inflationary pressures

over the medium term. With both pillars ofthe monetary policy strategy pointing toupside risks to price stability, the Governing
Council of the ECB decided to raise the keyECB interest rates on four occasions duringthe first half of 2000 (by 25 basis points on

3 February, 16 March and 27 April 2000 andby 50 basis points on 8 June). The interestrate of the main refinancing operations of the
Eurosystem was thereby raised to 4.25% andthe interest rates applicable to the depositand marginal lending facilities were raised to
3.25% and 5.25% respectively.On 8 June 2000 the Governing Council of theECB also decided that, starting with theoperation settled on 28 June 2000, the mainrefinancing operations were to be conducted13as variable rate tenders with theannouncement of a minimum bid rate. The
minimum bid rate was initially set at the same

level as the preceding interest rate in fixedrate tenders (4.25%). This switch to variablerate tenders with a minimum bid rate in the

main refinancing operations was a responseto the severe overbidding which haddeveloped in the context of the fixed rate
tender procedure used until then and wasnot intended as a change in the monetarypolicy stance (see Section 1 in Chapter II). It
was also announced that the minimum bid
rate would henceforth play the rolepreviously performed by the rate in fixed
rate tenders to signal the monetary policystance.In the course of summer 2000, informationfrom the first pillar pointed towards a gradualslowdown in the growth of monetary
aggregates, especially the most liquid
components of M3, probably reflecting the
gradual increases in ECB interest rates. Total
credit growth in the euro area also sloweddown, although mainly because of thedownward path of general government credit

growth. However, the rate of M3 growthremained above the reference value, stayingat around 5.5% at the end of summer.From the point of view of the second pillar, itbecame increasingly evident during the summer
of 2000 that consumer price inflation would,as a result of the continuous rise in oil pricesin US dollar terms, remain above 2% for a
period longer than previously anticipated. Thisincreased the risk of the emergence of second-round effects further. These concerns were

compounded by the developments of theexchange rate of the euro, which depreciatedsignificantly further as from mid-June 2000.
In addition, data for economic activitycontinued to point towards strong economicgrowth, supported by a continuing favourable
international environment. In this context, mostinflation forecasts for 2001 were also revisedupwards in the third quarter of 2000.As upside risks to price stability remainedsignificant, the Governing Council decided toraise the key ECB interest rates by 25 basispoints each on both 31 August and 5 October2000. After these decisions, the minimum
bid rate on the main refinancing operationsreached 4.75% and the rates on the depositfacility and the marginal lending facility stood
at 3.75% and 5.75% respectively.Over the summer of 2000, the level of the
exchange rate of the euro had moved further
out of line with the sound fundamentals ofthe euro area, thereby also raising concerns
about potential implications for the worldeconomy. The depreciation of the euro wasaddressed at the level of the G7 on

22 September 2000, on the initiative of theECB, in the form of a concerted interventionin the foreign exchange market together with
the monetary authorities of the United States,Japan, the United Kingdom and Canada. The
ECB, consistent with its concerns about the

risks for price stability in the euro area
stemming from the depreciation of the
exchange rate of the euro, decided to
intervene again in foreign exchange marketsin early November.In late 2000, the signs of moderation in M3growth became stronger as the increases inECB interest rates as from November 1999
appeared to have significantly curbed the
demand of the most liquid components ofM3, which was only partially offset by the
strong increase in marketable instruments.The annual growth of credit to the privatesector remained relatively high, as it was
connected with the financing bytelecommunications companies of thepayments of the UMTS licences to the
government sector. The growth in total creditto euro area residents declined byapproximately 2 percentage points between
April and October 2000, with the growthof credit to the private sector declining by0.5 percentage point in the same period.
Overall, the picture of the risks to pricestability stemming from the first pillar thusbecame more balanced in the autumn of 2000.
In late 2000 there were first indications thatthe impact of the rise in oil prices might have14contributed to a slowdown in economicactivity in the euro area. In addition,
uncertainty surfaced with regard to the
economic performance of the United Statesand Japan. Data on industrial production and
confidence indicators broadly indicated thateuro area production growth seemed to havereached a peak in the second quarter of the

year and moderated thereafter. At the same
time, positive developments in the labour
market continued throughout the year and
probably contributed to the stabilisation ofconsumer confidence at high levels. In thefirst months of 2001, the outlook for
sustained economic growth in the euro arearemained positive.Developments in the financial markets aroundthe turn of the year reflected this generaloutlook for sustained growth in the euro
area in a global environment of heightened
uncertainty. The exchange rate of the euro
appreciated significantly against all major
currencies as from late November 2000.Furthermore, bond yields suggested thatmarkets expected economic growth in theeuro area to remain strong, and inflation todevelop in line with the Governing Council™s
definition of price stability over the medium
term.The significant fall in US dollar oil pricesfollowing their November peak, and theappreciation of the exchange rate of the euro
contributed to a downward movement inannual consumer price inflation. However, inlate 2000 and early 2001 there were still
some elements of upward risk to pricestability. HICP inflation remained significantlyabove 2% and HICP inflation excluding energy,
although remaining relatively subdued, startedto reflect, as from the autumn of 2000, the
indirect effects on inflation of past increases
in oil prices and the past depreciation of the
exchange rate of the euro, i.e. the pass-through from higher producer price increases
at earlier stages in the production process.Another risk was related to wage prospects,especially in light of the relatively high level
of HICP inflation in the second half of 2000,in an environment of strong economicgrowth. In addition, signs of a loosening ofChart 1ECB interest rates and money market rates(percentages per annum; daily data)Sources: ECB and Reuters.Note: The rate for main refinancing operations is the rate applicable to fixed rate tenders for operations settled before 28 June 2000.Thereafter, the rate reflects the minimum bid rate applicable to variable rate tenders.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1
19992000
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.01.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0marginal lending ratedeposit ratemain refinancing/minimum bid rateovernight interest rate (EONIA)marginal rate in main refinancing operation-15fiscal policy in several euro area countriesbegan to materialise and deserved to be takeninto consideration. The indications provided
by the Eurosystem staff economic projectionspublished in December 2000 broadlyconfirmed the outlook of upside risks to price
stability remaining.At its meeting on 14 December 2000, theGoverning Council of the ECB conducted itsregular review of the reference value for M3growth and confirmed the value of 4½% for
the broad aggregate M3. This decision wasbased on the annual review of theassumptions underlying the derivation of the
reference value, namely those with regard tothe trend decline in M3 income velocity(maintained in the range of ½% to 1%) and
trend potential output growth (maintained inthe range from 2 to 2½%). The GoverningCouncil noted that there was still no decisiveevidence of measurable and lasting increases
in productivity growth in the euro area thatwould warrant a significant upward revisionin the assumption for trend potential GDP
growth, although it was felt that theuncertainties surrounding estimates of themedium-term development of potential
output growth in the euro area had becomeskewed to the upside. The Governing Councilannounced that it would carefully monitor
evidence on the possible acceleration of
productivity growth in the euro area. It wasalso emphasised that potential output growth
could be strengthened by further structuralreforms in the labour and goods markets.Naturally, monetary policy would take such
changes appropriately into account.2Monetary and financial developments
2.1Monetary developments
M3 growth slowed down in the course of 2000The annual growth rate of the broadaggregate M3 averaged 5.7% in 2000,unchanged from 1999. However, the stability
of the average growth rate masked a changingtrend in monetary developments throughoutthe year (see Chart 2). The annual rate of
growth in M3 continued to increase in the
first four months of 2000, reaching a peak ofChart 2M3 growth and the reference value
(annual percentage changes)Source: ECB.Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
 1998  1999  2000 
3.04.05.06.0
7.03.04.05.06.0
7.0M3M3 (three-month centred moving average rounded to the first decimal)reference value (41/2%)166.7% in April, but fell significantly during the
remainder of the year. As a result, the gapbetween M3 growth and its reference valueof 4½% progressively narrowed. The three-
month moving average of annual M3 growthwas 5.1% in the last quarter of 2000.During 2000, sustained economic growth inboth real and nominal terms fostered thedemand for money for transaction purposes.
The particularly strong dynamics in M3
growth recorded in the first quarter of 2000may moreover also have been driven by
precautionary moves on the part of investorsfaced with high uncertainty in the stockexchange markets over the same period, as
indicated by the pronounced growth in M1 inearly 2000. The moderation in M3 growthexperienced as from the second quarter of
2000 probably reflected the successiveincreases in ECB interest rates as from
November 1999 and, via the associated rise
in short-term money market rates, the
increased opportunity costs of holding themost liquid components of M3. This hada dampening impact on demand for thosecomponents which bear no interest orwhich respond less, in terms of their rate of
return, to changes in market rates, such ascurrency in circulation and overnight deposits
(i.e. M1), as well as deposits redeemable ata period of notice of up to three months.This effect more than offset that of the
increase in demand for short-term timedeposits and marketable instruments in M3
(see Chart 3).Turning to a more detailed analysis of M3components, the annual growth in currency
in circulation, which had recovered stronglyin 1999, not least as a result of the temporaryrise in the precautionary demand for currency
due to the century date change, followed adownward trend throughout the year 2000.The slowdown became more pronounced in
the second half of the year, presumably as aresult of the rising opportunity costs ofholding currency. As a result, in the fourth
quarter of 2000 the annual rate of increase in
currency in circulation declined to 1.8%,compared with 6.0% in the corresponding
quarter of 1999.Chart 3Components of M3(annual percentage changes)Source: ECB.Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
199819992000
-10-505101520-10
-505101520currency in circulationovernight depositsother short-term depositsmarketable instruments17As for overnight deposits, having stood at 12.7%
in April 2000, the annual growth rate of this
category of deposits followed a sharp downward
trend from spring onwards, presumably because
of rising opportunity costs. In the last quarterof 2000, the average annual rate of increase
declined to 6.4%, representing a significant
decrease from the values recorded in the fourth
quarter of 1999 (13.5%).Short-term deposits other than overnightdeposits continued, on average, to expand
very moderately during 2000. In the lastquarter of the year they grew by 2.2% in
annual terms compared with 2.0% in the
corresponding quarter of 1999. However, thesubdued pace of growth in this category ofdeposits in 2000 concealed the rather
contrasting dynamics of its two sub-components.While the demand for deposits with an agreedmaturity of up to two years grew strongly in2000 (5.6%), that for deposits redeemable at
a period of notice of up to three monthsdeclined over the same period (-1.6%). Thediverging development of the two sub-
components of short-term deposits other
than overnight deposits can largely beattributed to the behaviour of the retail
interest rates paid on them (see Chart 9).In 2000 the expansion of marketableinstruments included in M3, namely negotiableinstruments and repurchase agreements,remained very strong. In the last quarter of
2000 the annual growth rate stood at 13.2%,representing a significant increase from themoderate annual growth rates recorded in
the fourth quarter of 1999 (2.5%). Asmentioned above, the strong demand for
these instruments may, at least to some
extent, have reflected the flattening of theyield curve in 2000. The behaviour ofmarketable instruments issued by euro area
Monetary Financial Institutions (MFIs) should,however, be interpreted with caution as it is
not possible, within the current statistical
framework of the Eurosystem, to estimatewith precision the part which is held by non-euro area residents. Such purchases by non-euro area residents are likely to havedistorted M3 growth upwards in 2000.In January 2001 the annual rate of M3 growthdecreased to 4.7% from 5.2% in December
2000, continuing the declining trend from the

second quarter of last year. The three-monthaverage of the annual growth rates of M3
also declined to 5.0% in the period from
November 2000 to January 2001, from 5.1%in the period from October to December
2000.Total credit slowed down somewhat in 2000Turning to the counterparts of M3, credit to
euro area residents slowed down in 2000. The
annual average growth in this item was 7.4%,compared with 8.4% in the year before. Thismoderation was mainly attributable to a
reduction in credit extended to generalgovernment (the average annual rate of changewas -1.3% in 2000, compared with 2.9% in 1999),
while the growth of credit to the private sectorremained strong (it averaged 10.5% in 2000,unchanged from 1999).
With respect to credit to the privatesector, the annual increase in loans
fluctuated between 8.8% and 10.5%. Towardsthe end of the year, however, the short-rundynamics of loans to the private sector
seemed to show incipient signs of aslowdown. The increase in loans to theprivate sector in 2000 was driven primarily

by a significant increase in loans tonon-financial corporations. The pace ofexpansion in loans to households, by

contrast, declined somewhat, mainlyreflecting a moderation in the demand for
house financing (see Chart 4).
The robust growth of economic activity inthe euro area and the high level of business
and consumer confidence fostered theexpansion of loans to households andcorporations in the course of 2000. A front-
loading of borrowing due to expectations ofrising interest rates may also have playedsome role, especially in the first half of the18year. Merger and acquisition transactions
inside the euro area as well as foreign direct
investment abroad may have been additionalfactors. Finally, the interplay betweenmortgage loans and buoyant real estate prices
in some euro area countries spurred thedemand for loans, in particular, in the firsthalf of 2000, whereas signs of a moderation

in the increase in house prices were visible inthe last few months of the year. At the sametime, the continued increase in lending rates,
which followed that in market interest ratesat corresponding maturities with some lag,contributed to dampening credit in the euro
area. A slowdown in credit growth was infact visible during the second quarter of theyear (the annual growth rate of loans to the

private sector peaked at 10.5% in April andsubsequently slowed down to 9.1% in July).Thereafter, the demand for loans was

very much affected by the need of some
telecommunications companies to financethe purchase of third-generation mobile

telephone (UMTS) licences, especially inGermany. As a result, the annual growth rateof loans to the private sector was again closeChart 4Sectoral breakdown of loans by MFIs(annual percentage changes; end-of-quarter data)Source: ECB.to 10% in the autumn months. Subsequently,
the annual rate of growth of loans to the

private sector declined again, reaching 9.5%in December 2000 and 9.1% in January 2001.
The lagged effect of the rise in lending rates
as well as the slight weakening of euro area
economic growth associated with the rise in
oil prices in the autumn may have contributed
to this development.In sharp contrast to the strong growth in creditto the private sector, the change in credit togeneral government was negative in the course
of 2000 (the annual rate of decline in MFI loans
was 1.9% in the fourth quarter of 2000; that ofsecurities was 8.9%). On the whole, thisdevelopment was consistent with the reduced
borrowing requirements in a phase of strong
economic activity and reflected the highproceeds derived in some countries from the
sale of UMTS licenses in the course of 2000. Asto the other counterparts of M3, the longer-term liabilities of the MFI sector increased at a

relatively moderate pace in 2000 (the averageannual growth rate was 6.2% in the last quarterof 2000; 7.2% in the corresponding quarter of
Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
 1999  2000 
-4.0-2.00.02.04.06.08.010.012.014.0-4.0-2.00.02.04.06.08.010.012.014.0loans to the private sectorloans to householdsloans to non-financial corporationsloans to the general government191999). The slowdown in the pace of growth of
these instruments probably reflected to someextent the flattening of the yield curve in the
course of 2000.Finally, during 2000 the net external asset
position of the MFI sector fell significantly,
by 98 billion in the 12 months up toDecember. The fall was however smaller than
in 1999, when it amounted to 
177 billion.As in 1999, the decline in net external assetsprobably reflected net direct and portfolio
investment outflows from non-MFI residents.A slowdown in the pace of the decline innet external assets was visible in the second
part of the year, in tandem with a recovery
of net inflows from some financialtransactions between non-MFI residents and
the rest-of-the-world sector.2.2Financial markets
Continuing growth in the issuance of debtsecuritiesThe market for debt securities issued by euroarea residents continued to grow strongly in2000, with the amount of debt securities
outstanding increasing by about 7% betweenend-1999 and end-2000. Underlying this wasa 4% increase in the amount of short-term
debt securities outstanding and a 7% increasein the amount of long-term debt securities
outstanding. The total amount outstanding
remained dominated by long-term debt
securities, which accounted for more than90% of the total amount outstanding at the
end of 2000.Central government and the MFI sector stilldominate the euro area debt securitiesmarket in absolute terms of both amountsoutstanding and issuance. The growth rates
of amounts outstanding of debt securitiesissued by these sectors was low in 2000 bycomparison with the issuance activity of the

non-monetary financial and non-financial
sectors (see Chart 5), for which the amountsoutstanding of euro-denominated debt
securities grew by approximately 24% and17% respectively in 2000. Apart from therobust economic growth of the euro area,
the continued high issuance activity of thesesectors is to a large extent due to ongoingrestructuring in the European corporate
sector. Furthermore, the need of thetelecommunications sector to finance itsChart 5Amounts outstanding of euro-denominated debt securities
issued by euro area residents(annual percentage changes)Source: ECB.1994199519961997199819992000
-100102030405060-100102030405060monetary financial institutionsnon-financial corporationsnon-monetary financial corporationspublic sector20acquisitions of UMTS licences was animportant element in the second half of theyear. At the same time, there are strong

signs that the single currency has contributedto the improvement of conditions for privateissuers to tap the European capital markets.
Moreover, as discussed in the article entitledﬁCharacteristics of corporate finance in theeuro areaﬂ in the February 2001 issue of the
ECB Monthly Bulletin, there are indicationsthat the euro area corporate sector hasextended its market financing sources to
increasingly include direct financing through
the issuance of debt securities.
As a consequence of very different growthrates in amounts outstanding between thedifferent sectors, non-monetary financial
institutions and non-financial corporationsincreased their combined share of the stock
of euro-denominated debt securities from
8.5% in 1999 to 9.7% in 2000. The MFI sector™sshare of the stock of euro-denominated debt
securities rose from 37.0% at the end of 1999

to 37.4% in 2000, largely reflecting the financingof increased loans to the private sector.Mirroring these increasing shares, the general
government™s share of the stock of euro-denominated securities dropped from 54.5% at
the end of 1999 to 53.0% at the end of 2000.
The continued reduction in the relativeimportance of the public sector in the euro
area debt securities markets reflects the
reduced borrowing requirements of the public
sector in 2000 compared with previous years.The share of gross issuance of euro-denominated debt securities issued by euroarea residents in total issuance in all
currencies remained high in 2000, butdeclined by comparison with 1999. Comparedwith an average share of 94.6% in 1999, gross

issuance in euro represented 92.6% of totalgross issuance by euro area residents in 2000.The euro remained an attractive currency
also for international investors, even if growth
rates in 2000 did not reach the extraordinarylevels of 1999. The amount outstanding of
euro-denominated debt securities issued bynon-residents of the euro area grew by 26.3%
in 2000 (compared with 42.4% in 1999).Money market interest rates increased in
line with ECB interest rates in 2000In the course of 2000, money market interestrates rose substantially. This mirrored thegradual increase in ECB rates which took
place in six steps by a total of 175 basispoints during 2000. The rise in money marketinterest rates in the course of the year was
broadly anticipated by the financial markets.This can be seen by the fact that at thebeginning of 2000 the 12-month EURIBOR,
at around 3.9%, was significantly above the
then prevailing one-month EURIBOR of 3.1%(see Chart 6) which indicated that the

financial markets expected a sizeable increase
in money market rates during 2000.Ahead of the announcement of the decisionsto increase ECB interest rates, the overnightinterest rate, as measured by the EONIA,
typically tended to stand above the rates
which signalled the stance of monetary policy(this was the rate applicable to fixed rate
tenders until the main refinancing operationsettled on 21 June 2000 and the minimum bidrate applicable to variable rate tenders
thereafter). As was also the case in 1999, the
volatility of the EONIA was low and confinedto the end of the reserve maintenance
periods when the minimum reserve constrainton the banking system becomes binding. Inaddition, the EONIA tended to increase
somewhat on the last trading day of each
month, reflecting financial institutions™ desireto adjust their balance sheets at these times.

This occurred most markedly at the turn ofthe year.In the first half of 2000, money marketinterest rates moved very much in parallelwith the gradual upward adjustment of the
path of ECB interest rates. Of the fourincreases in ECB interest rates in the firsthalf of 2000, the first three had been almost
fully anticipated by financial markets by thetime they were announced and resulted inonly very small adjustments in short-term
money market interest rates. Only on theoccasion of the 50 basis point increase inECB interest rates on 8 June 2000 was the21reaction of short-term money market ratessomewhat more pronounced, suggesting thatthe size of this move was not fully anticipated
by market participants.The increase in ECB interest rates announcedon 8 June interrupted, for a period of aroundtwo months, the upward trend in the one-
month and three-month EURIBOR as this

decision temporarily curbed expectationsof a further interest rate increase in thenear term. However, between the middle of
August and October, the increase in moneymarket rates at the short end of the curveresumed, anticipating the two increases in
ECB interest rates that were announced on31 August and on 5 October. These decisionssubsequently contributed to the moderation
of expectations of further increases in ECBinterest rates.In the autumn, the money market sentimentgradually changed. While the 12-monthEURIBOR had already started to decline in

September, shorter-term money market rates
gradually started to fall in the course ofNovember. The fall in longer-term money
market interest rates was most pronounced,and in early December 2000 the moneymarket yield curve started to invert. At theend of 2000, the 12-month EURIBOR stood
at 4.75% which was around the same level as
in early May 2000, and more than 50 basispoints below the level reached in September,
while the one-month EURIBOR was equal to4.85%, which was 20 basis points below thepeak reached in late November.The change in market sentiment in theautumn of 2000 was related to a rise in
implied volatility associated with options on
futures contracts on the three-monthEURIBOR, signalling an increase in the
perceived uncertainty about future monetarypolicy moves on the part of marketparticipants. However, this increase in
volatility reversed only a part of the falls inimplied money market volatility which wereobserved in the first ten months of 2000.
In the first two months of 2001, the declinein money market interest rates came to a

halt. The slope of the money market yieldcurve, measured as the difference betweenthe 12-month and one-month EURIBOR,
remained slightly inverted throughout thisChart 6Short-term interest rates in the euro area(percentages per annum; daily data)Source: Reuters.Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1
19992000
2.22.42.62.83.0
3.23.43.6
3.8
4.0
4.24.44.64.8
5.05.25.4
5.62.2
2.42.62.83.0
3.23.43.6
3.8
4.0
4.24.44.64.8
5.05.25.4
5.6one-month EURIBORthree-month EURIBORsix-month EURIBORtwelve-month EURIBOR22period, suggesting that market participantsexpected short-term money market rates tofall somewhat during the remainder of 2001.Euro area long-term bond yields broadly
stable throughout much of 2000In contrast to the pronounced increase inlong-term interest rates which took placeduring 1999, long-term government bondyields in the euro area remained broadly

stable around a level close to 5.5%throughout much of 2000 (see Chart 7(a)).
It was only towards the end of the year, from
November 2000 onwards, that bond yieldsdeclined somewhat, bringing them down to alevel of just above 5.0% by the end of the
year.  In the US bond markets ten-year bond
yields dropped by around 130 basis points inthe course of 2000. At the end of 2000, this
yield stood at 5.2%, which was the lowestlevel that had prevailed since the spring of1999. Reflecting these developments, the
differential between US and euro area ten-year bond yields narrowed by around 85 basispoints during 2000, to reach a level of around
15 basis points by the end of 2000, whichwas the lowest level since end-1996 (seeChart 7(b)).
Upward revisions and a subsequentmoderation of global growth expectations
appear to have been an important factor inaccounting for trends in global long-term
bond yields in 2000. In the United States, the
robust pace of economic activity placedupward pressure on US long-term bond yieldsin January. US government bond yields

subsequently reversed direction in earlyFebruary 2000 and fell substantially, promptedby the US Treasury™s plans to significantly
scale back bond issuance at longer-termmaturities and to buy back bonds prior tomaturity. This seemed to result in the
emergence of a scarcity premium in US
government bond prices in early 2000, whichalso appeared to have contributed to the
marked widening of the spread of US swaprates over government bond yields by around50 basis points in the first months of 2000,bringing it to the highest levels that hadprevailed in a decade. The widening of this
spread was primarily due to a substantial dropin government bond yields, while the level of
ten-year swap rates remained broadly stablefrom late-January until end-April 2000.The prolonged and extensive downwardpressure on US bond yields that took placein the second half of 2000 seemed to be
attributable primarily to reassessments amonginvestors regarding the pace of future
economic activity. In particular, in view of
the Federal Reserve™s decisions to raiseofficial interest rates in 1999 and early 2000
as well as persistently high oil prices and the

strength of the US dollar, market participantsincreasingly came to expect that the pace of
US economic activity would slow down.
Against this background, long-term inflation
expectations declined, placing additionaldownward pressure on US bond yields. The
downward pressure on US long-term bondyields was reinforced at times during the year,as falling stock prices, together with surging
volatility in US stock markets, induced
investors to invest in relatively safer securitiessuch as government bonds.In Japan, long-term government bond yieldsdisplayed remarkable stability throughout
much of 2000, with the ten-year yieldremaining between 1.6% and 1.9% during
most of the year. Japanese ten-year bond

yields edged above this narrow range onlytemporarily, around the time of thetermination of the zero interest rate policy
by the Bank of Japan in August 2000.While developments in US bond marketsfrom time to time temporarily spilled over toeuro area government bond yields during theyear, a striking feature was that bond yield
movements in the euro area were much lesspronounced than in the United States. Inaddition, the average level around which euro

area bond yields fluctuated remained fairlystable throughout the first ten months of
2000. Two factors seem to have largely
accounted for this stability in nominal euroarea bond yields. First, long-term average23Chart 7Source: Reuters.Note: Long-term government bond yields refer to ten-year bonds or to the closest available bond maturity. From 1 January 2001,
Greek data are also included.inflation expectations among investorsseemed to remain stable at relatively low

levels during this period, reflecting theconfidence of market participants that theactions taken by the Governing Council of
the ECB would maintain price stability overthe medium term. This was visible from the
high degree of stability of the break-even

inflation rate derived from the differencebetween French ten-year nominal government
bond yields and the real yield on French ten-
year index-linked government bonds (seeChart 8), which remained between 1.5% and1.8% for much of 2000. Second, long-term
growth expectations for the euro areaappeared to level off at relatively high levels
in 2000, following the rapid increase in real
GDP growth in 1999 and early 2000. Thiswas indicated by the stability of the real yield
on French ten-year index-linked government
bonds at levels between 3.6% and 4.0% formuch of 2000. In the last two months of2000, there was a gradual decline in long-
term government bond yields in the euroarea, which reflected market expectationsof slightly slower economic growth in the
euro area in the shorter term. The main
factors underlying this downward revision in
expectations regarding the pace of economic
activity seemed to include the earlier rises inoil prices as well as the aforementioned
downward adjustment of world economicgrowth Œ most notably in the United States.Between end-1999 and end-2000, the slopeof the euro area yield curve, as measured by
the difference between ten-year bond yields
and the three-month EURIBOR, flattened byaround 200 basis points to around 20 basispoints. Two periods could be distinguished in
this process of pronounced flattening of theyield curve in 2000. During the first ten
months of the year, it mainly reflected
increasing short-term money market ratesresulting from increases in ECB interest rates,while long-term bond yields remained broadly

stable. During the last two months of 2000,however, short-term interest rates declined,and the continued flattening of the yield curve

was therefore attributable to larger declinesin long-term bond yields. Furthermore,towards the end of 2000, the yield curve
(a) Long-term government bond yields in theeuro area, the United States and Japan(percentages per annum; daily data)  (b) Ten-year interest rate differential 
of the United States against the euro area(percentages per annum; daily data)19961997199819992000
0.03.0
6.09.00.03.0
6.09.0euro area United States Japan 19961997199819992000
-2.0-1.00.0
1.0
2.0-2.0
-1.00.0
1.0
2.024Chart 8Break-even inflation rate calculated for the French CPI(as percentages; daily data)Sources: French Treasury, ISMA and Reuters.
Note: The real bond yields are derived from the market prices of French bonds which are indexed to the French CPI (excluding
tobacco) and mature in 2009. The nominal bond yields are derived from the market prices of French fixed income bonds which also
mature in 2009.inverted slightly at maturities of up to two
years, while remaining upward sloping for
longer maturities. This could be seen as
indicating that the downward revision ofgrowth expectations was concentrated at

shorter horizons, while market participants™
long-term growth expectations appeared tochange little.
In the period from end-2000 to 13 March2001, ten-year government bond yields in the
euro area remained broadly stable at close to
5%. Owing to the fact that long-term bond
yields in the United States tended to decline

during the same period, in an environmentwhere US official interest rates were cut by100 basis points, the differential between ten-
year government bond yields in the UnitedStates and those in the euro area narrowed
and was virtually nil by early March 2001.
This was the lowest point this spread hadreached since early 1997.
Retail rates broadly followed market rates
in 2000Short-term retail bank interest ratesincreased until November 2000, following thetrend set by money market rates. However,significant differences could be observed

between the rates for various forms ofdeposits. From the end of 1999 until
November 2000, the three-month money
market rate rose by 165 basis points. Overthe same period, the rates for overnightdeposits and deposits redeemable at a period
of notice of up to three months bothincreased fairly modestly, by about 40 basispoints, increasing the spread vis-à-vis the
three-month money market rate byapproximately 125 basis points by the end of2000. The rate on deposits with maturities
of up to one year, by contrast, increased
by 134 basis points (see Chart 9). Thisdevelopment is not particularly unusual, given
historical experience which shows that thepass-through from market rates has tendedto be slower and less complete for deposits
redeemable at a period of notice of up to
three months than for deposits with anagreed maturity of up to two years, but it
increased the relative attractiveness ofdeposits with agreed maturities of up to two
years, as reflected by its relatively strong
growth (see Section 1.1 for details ofmonetary developments). Retail rates forloans to enterprises with maturities of up toQ4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1
19992000
01234560
123456break-even inflation ratenominal bond yieldreal bond yield25Chart 9Short-term retail bank interest rates and a comparable market rate(percentages per annum; monthly averages)Sources: ECB and Reuters.Note: From 1 January 2001, Greek data are also included.one year increased by 137 basis points up toNovember. This mirrored the development
of short-term market interest rates, with this
lending rate peaking at a level of 210 basispoints above the three-month money market
rate in November (compared with 238 basis
points at the end of 1999). From mid-November, money market rates started to

decline. This was quickly reflected in the rateon deposits with an agreed maturity of up toone year, which decreased by 17 basis points
between November 2000 and January 2001.The lending rate to enterprises for up to oneyear also declined, albeit to a lesser degree.
These developments suggested a relativelyspeedy pass-through from money marketrates. However, other retail interest rates,
such as those on overnight deposits and ondeposits redeemable at a period of notice of
up to three months, did not change much
over this period, indicating a higher degree ofstickiness in these rates.
Long-term retail bank interest rates generally
increased strongly in the first part of 2000,catching up with the increases which had
taken place in government bond yields in thecourse of 1999. Later on, reflecting thestability of long-term bond yields in the first
three quarters of 2000, retail rates generally
began to stabilise as from around summer

2000 (see Chart 10). For instance, the rate
for deposits with maturities of over two yearsincreased by 69 basis points between the end
of 1999 and July 2000, and by only 6 basispoints from July to November 2000.Furthermore, the rate for housing loans to
households increased by 72 basis points fromDecember 1999 to August 2000, and
subsequently stabilised. After November
these rates started to decline, reflecting thedevelopment of government bond yields latein the year.Global stock prices dropped in a volatileenvironmentIn 2000, stock price indices in the world™smajor markets did not continue the upwardtrend that had been apparent from 1995onwards. In an environment in which stock

prices exhibited significant volatility duringmost of the year, broadly based benchmark
stock price indices ended up lower at the

end of 2000 than they had been at the
end of 1999. These developments primarily
reflected the heightened uncertainty of19961997199819992000
0.02.04.0
6.0
8.010.00.02.04.0
6.0
8.010.0three-month money market rateloans to enterprises with a maturity of up to one yeardeposits with an agreed maturity of up to one yeardeposits redeemable at notice of up to three monthsovernight deposits26Chart 10Long-term retail bank interest rates and a comparable market rate
(percentages per annum; monthly averages)Sources: ECB and Reuters.Note: From 1 January 2001, Greek data are also inluded.market participants with respect to the nearand longer-term earnings prospects of firms

in general as well as significant downwardrevisions that were registered with respectto the earnings expectations of firms active
in the high-technology sectors.Stock price developments in the course of2000 followed similar patterns in the United
States, Japan and the euro area (seeChart 11). In the first months of the year,
stock price indices generally increased Œrather sharply in the euro area. Subsequently,stock prices were subject to some turbulence,
after which, from late August onwards, theygenerally tended to decline. Overall, stockprices in the euro area, as measured by the
Dow Jones EURO STOXX index, stood at6% below their end-1999 levels by the end ofDecember 2000. In the United States, the
Standard and Poor™s 500 index fell by 9%over the same period, while in Japan theNikkei 225 index declined by 27% in 2000.

However, the decline in stock price indices
during 2000 should be seen from the
perspective of the substantial price increases
that had taken place over recent years. Inparticular, these declines followed increasesof 40% in the Dow Jones EURO STOXXindex, 20% in the Standard and Poor™s 500
index and 37% in the Nikkei 225 index in

1999.Events in the United States were the maindriving factors behind stock marketmovements worldwide. Persistently strongeconomic growth in the United States at the
start of 2000 had created a very optimisticsentiment among investors regarding thelong-run profitability of stocks, particularly

those of the so-called ﬁnew economyﬂ, asbest epitomised by internet firms. In thecourse of the year, evidence accumulated that
the US economy was heading towards aslowdown in the pace of economic activity.Simultaneously, market participants revised
their long-term expectations of corporateearnings downwards, specifically in the high-technology sector. As a result of this switch
in the preference of investors away from high-
technology stocks, the Nasdaq Composite
index (which contains a high proportion of
ﬁnew economyﬂ stocks) declined by 37%between the end of 1999 and the end of2000. This pronounced decline eliminated the
substantial increases that had been recordedin 1999, leaving this index back at early 1999levels by end-2000. Reflecting the higher
19961997199819992000
3.04.05.0
6.07.08.03.04.05.0
6.07.08.0five-year government bond yieldsloans to households for house purchasedeposits with an agreed maturity of over two yearsloans to enterprises with a maturity of over one year27Chart 11Stock price indices in the euro area, the United States and Japan(1 January 1998 = 100; daily data)
Source: Reuters.Note: Dow Jones EURO STOXX broad (stock price) index for the euro area, Standard and Poor™s 500 for the United States and

Nikkei 225 for Japan. From 1 January 2001, Greek data are also included.degree of uncertainty among marketparticipants about the earnings prospects of
firms active in the high-technology segmentof the market, the implied volatility on the
Nasdaq 100 index fluctuated markedly in the

course of the year. In December 2000 it wasabout one-third higher than one year before(see Box 2).In Japan, stock prices in the high-technology
market segment also showed pronounced
declines in 2000. In particular, Japanesetelecommunications, media and informationtechnology (TMT) stocks fell by 53% between

end-1999 and end-2000. Non-TMT stocks,
by contrast, declined by 12% over the sameperiod (as measured by Datastream total
market sub-indices). In addition to theemerging concerns among market participantsabout the general profitability of high-

technology stocks spilling over from theUnited States, the Japanese stock market was
further depressed by the subdued economic
development in Japan and by a large numberof corporate defaults.
While euro area stocks benefited from theoverall positive development in economic
activity in the euro area, they were notimmune to the aforementioned global factors.As in other economies, reflecting the
heightened uncertainty of market participantsabout the prospects for corporateprofitability, the volatility of stock prices in
the euro area remained rather high duringmost of 2000. The largest contribution to theoverall decline and the pronounced volatility
of stock prices in the euro area came fromthe technology sector as well as from thetelecommunications sector. While stock

prices in these sectors picked up sharply inthe first quarter of 2000, continuing anupward tendency that had been apparent
from autumn 1999 onwards, they drifteddownwards in the course of the rest of theyear. Ultimately, stock prices of the
telecommunications sector in the Dow JonesEURO STOXX index declined by 43% in2000, as market participants became
particularly concerned about the inherent
risks and the long-run profitability prospectsof telecommunications firms in the light ofQ1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1
199819992000
6080100
120140160
180
200
2206080100
120140160
180
200
220euro areaUnited StatesJapan28Box 2Global stock market volatility increased driven by high-technology stock marketsStock price trends can provide useful information in the context of the second pillar of the monetary policystrategy of the Eurosystem. The information contained in stock prices derives from the fact that stock pricesshould reflect, inter alia, the expectations of market participants regarding future dividends, which are linked,in turn, to expected corporate profits. As expected corporate profits are generally related to the anticipated
pace of economic activity, stock price movements may be indicative of changes in market participants™expectations with regard to economic growth. In this respect, stock price developments can provide informationcomplementary to the information drawn from other asset prices, like nominal bond yields and the real yields
on inflation-index linked bonds, for instance. It is also important for central banks to closely monitordevelopments in stock prices to assess the wealth and confidence effects that might arise from stock pricemovements. However, from the viewpoint of monetary policy, high stock price volatility, together with the
possibility of misalignments between stock prices and their fundamentals, renders the assessment of stockprice developments for future economic conditions more difficult.Over much of 2000, global stock markets were subject to relatively large price fluctuations. As a consequence,average stock price volatility in the major markets increased further in 2000, continuing a tendency that has been

apparent for some years. For example, while the average annualised standard deviation of daily percentage stock
price changes (historical volatility) in the euro area, as measured by the Dow Jones EURO STOXX index, was15% between 1990 and 1998, it increased to 17% in 1999 and further to 22% in 2000 (see the chart below).The worldwide rise in recent years in the volatility of those stock price indices which cover a broad array ofdifferent industries was, to a large extent, due to developments in the high-technology sectors of the stock
markets. The pronounced divergence in stock price developments between those segments of the marketrepresenting the so-called ﬁnew economyﬂ and the 
ﬁold economyﬂ seemed to originate from the United States.
The historical volatility of the Nasdaq Composite index Œ which contains a high proportion of high-technology
stocks Œ almost doubled from 27% per annum in 1999 to 48% in 2000, compared to an average volatility of
16% over the period from 1990 to 1998. By contrast, the historical volatility of the Standard and Poor
™s 500index Œ which contains a higher proportion of old economy stocks 
Œ increased only slightly to 22%, on
average, in 2000. The same pattern is apparent in the euro area. The stock price volatility of the technologysector and the telecommunications sector of the Dow Jones EURO STOXX index increased from 28% and27% in 1999 to 51% and 45% in 2000, respectively, while the median volatility of all economic sectors of this

index picked up to a lesser degree, from 19% to 22%.
The large price swings that took place in the high-technology sectors of all major markets in the course of2000 were essentially related to the general reassessment among market participants of the longer-termearnings prospects and the inherent risks of high-technology stocks. While in the first months of the yearinvestors had become increasingly optimistic about the long-term profit perspectives of ﬁnew economyﬂstocks, they seemed to become more pessimistic and uncertain about these prospects afterwards. The highstock price volatility in the high-technology sector reflected unusual difficulties encountered by marketparticipants with the valuation of such stocks. Firms of the ﬁnew economyﬂ are usually young and offer the
potential for high earnings growth given their innovative character. However, in many cases, these earningsare generally only delivered at later stages in these firms™ life cycles while they often report limited earnings at
earlier stages or even losses. As a result, particularly given start-up costs associated with investment and
uncertain business prospects, considerable uncertainty can surround their long-term profitability prospects.Moreover, high-technology stocks can be particularly vulnerable to business risks (changes in technology andconsumer preferences) and liquidity shocks.The increased degree of uncertainty of market participants was reflected in the heightened level of the impliedvolatility of stocks contained in the Nasdaq 100 index (see the chart below). The implied volatility is derived29from the prices of options written on corresponding stocks and provides an approximation of the expectedstandard deviation of percentage stock price changes which, in this case, is over a period of up to three months.
Thus, implied volatility is an indicator of the uncertainty as to future price movements. The implied volatilityof the Nasdaq 100 index increased from an average value of 36% in 1999 to 51% in 2000. By contrast, theaverage implied volatility of stocks that form the Standard and Poor™s 500 index stood unchanged at 21% in2000 compared with the 1999 level. The generally high degree of co-movement between the historical andimplied volatility in all major markets suggests that the more uncertain market participants became aboutfuture stock prices, the higher became their sensitivity to incoming news with regard to earnings or other
fundamental factors as reflected in large observed price fluctuations.Historical and implied stock market volatility(percentages per annum; monthly data)Sources: Bloomberg and ECB calculations.Note: Historical volatility is calculated as the annualised standard deviation of daily stock price percentage changes over one
month. For the euro area, historical volatility is calculated on the basis of Dow Jones EURO STOXX stock price indices. Implied

volatility is derived from options on stock price indices. For the broad market and the technology sector of the euro area, imp
liedvolatility is approximated by using options on the Dow Jones EURO STOXX 50 index and the Dow Jones STOXX technology

sector sub-index, respectively.increasing competition in this sector aswell as increasing debt as a result of
major investment necessary to developtelecommunications networks and the needto finance the purchase of UMTS licences.
Technology stock prices were also volatile in2000, but did not decline to the same extent.In line with global developments, the
technology sector made by far the largestcontribution to the heightened degree ofprice volatility in euro area stock markets in
2000.In the period from end-2000 to 13 March2001, stock price indices in the major stock
markets dropped sharply. Over this period,
the Dow Jones EURO STOXX index declinedby 11%, while the Standard and Poor™s 500
index and the Nikkei 225 index fell by 12%and 14%, respectively. These developmentsreflected uncertainty regarding corporate

earnings prospects, particularly for thehigh-technology sectors.010203040506070
8090100Jan.Sep.MayJan.Sep.May
010203040506070
8090100implied volatility Standard & Poor™s 500implied volatility Nasdaqhistorical volatility Standard & Poor™s 500historical volatility Nasdaq0102030405060708090100Jan.JuneNov.Apr.Sep.
0102030405060708090
100implied volatility EURO STOXXimplied volatility STOXX technologyhistorical volatility EURO STOXXhistorical volatility EURO STOXX technology 199920001997199819992000
303Price developments
Rise in inflation mainly owing to externalfactorsThe upward trend in the annual rate ofchange in the HICP observed since spring1999 continued in 2000 as a result of externalprice pressures, while domestic pressures
remained subdued. HICP inflation in the
euro area stood at 2.3% on average in2000, significantly up from 1.1% in 1999

(see Table 1). In year-on-year terms, HICPinflation rose from around 1% in mid-1999 to1.9% in January 2000 and further to 2.9% in

November, but fell subsequently to 2.6% inDecember 2000. This pattern mainly reflecteddevelopments in oil prices and the exchangerate of the euro. Although there was evidenceof some upward indirect effects of thesedevelopments on domestic prices in thecourse of 2000, domestic costs, such as unit
labour costs, saw only a modest rise duringthe year.Oil price increases reinforced by exchangerate movementsThe increase in energy prices, on average,
contributed more than 1 percentage point to
overall inflation in 2000. The annual rate ofchange in energy prices rose gradually from-4.4% in January 1999 to around 14% from June1998199920002000200020002000200020002000200020012001
Q1Q2Q3Q4Sep.Oct.Nov.Dec.Jan.Feb.
Harmonised Index ofConsumer Prices (HICP)
and its components1)Overall index1.11.12.32.02.12.52.72.82.72.92.62.5.
of which:
Goods0.70.92.72.32.32.93.23.33.23.43.02.7.
Food1.60.61.40.40.91.92.22.12.02.22.42.7.
Processed food1.40.91.11.01.01.11.31.31.21.41.41.7.

Unprocessed food1.90.01.7-0.40.73.13.53.33.23.53.94.4.
Industrial goods0.11.03.33.23.03.43.74.03.84.03.32.7.
Non-energy industrial goods0.90.60.70.50.60.61.00.80.91.01.11.2.
Energy-2.62.413.313.712.313.613.715.514.615.211.38.0.
Services1.91.51.71.61.71.81.81.81.91.81.82.2.
Other price and cost indicatorsIndustrial producer prices 1), 2)
-0.7-0.45.44.35.25.86.16.26.66.35.44.8.
Unit labour costs 3)
0.21.2.0.60.51.2.------
Labour productivity 3)
1.20.8.1.81.41.0.------
Compensation per employee 3)
1.42.0.2.42.02.3.------
Total hourly labour costs 4)
1.82.2.3.63.83.9.------
Oil prices (EUR per barrel)5)12.017.131.026.928.833.734.537.236.837.728.827.529.9
Commodity prices 6)
-12.5-3.118.119.918.318.016.421.423.118.28.63.31.9
Table 1Price and cost developments in the euro area(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)Sources: Eurostat, national data, International Petroleum Exchange, HWWA Œ Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung (Hamburg) and ECBcalculations.
1)Figures for January 2001 include Greece, with Greece also included in the base period (i.e. January 2000).

2)Excluding construction.

3)Whole economy.

4)Whole economy (excluding agriculture, public administration, education, health and other services).

5)Brent Blend (for one-month forward delivery). In ECU up to December 1998.

6)Excluding energy. In euro; in ECU up to December 1998.
31to November 2000, but fell to 11.3% in
December 2000 (see Chart 12). As a result, the
annual rate of change in the HICP energy
component rose, on average, from 2.4% in 1999
to 13.3% in 2000. These developments reflectedthe further upward pressure from rising
international oil market prices, reinforced bythe decline in the exchange rate of the euro, onthe HICP energy component in the course of

the year. In fact, oil prices rose from 10.3 perbarrel in the first quarter of 1999 to 23.1 perbarrel in the fourth quarter of 1999 and
subsequently to 34.5 per barrel in the fourthquarter of 2000.In addition to energy, unprocessed foodprices also contributed to a rise in theheadline inflation rate in the course of 2000,
although to a much lesser extent. There was
a significant rise in the level of unprocessed
food prices in the first half of 2000 owing to
a recovery in meat prices and unfavourableweather conditions which had a larger thannormal upward effect on vegetable and fruitprices. The impact of this on the year-on-
year rate was reinforced by base effectsresulting from the fall in unprocessed foodprices in mid-1999. In the second half of 2000
the annual rate of change in unprocessed
food prices rose further to reach 3.9% in
December 2000, also reflecting rising meat
prices resulting from higher prices for beefsubstitutes owing to the recent BSE scare insome euro area countries. The annual rate of
change in unprocessed food prices stood at1.7% on average in 2000, up from 0.0% in
1999.Developments in the less volatile HICPcomponents remained moderateThe annual average rate of increase in theHICP excluding unprocessed food and energyChart 12Breakdown of HICP inflation in the euro area by components(annual percentage changes; monthly data)Source: Eurostat.19961997199819992000
-6-4-2024
6
81012
1416-6-4-2024
6
81012
1416total HICPservicesunprocessed foodprocessed foodnon-energy industrial goodsenergy32rose slightly from 1.1% in 1999 to 1.2%in 2000. However, this masks the fact thatthe rate fell from 1.3% in January 1999 to

0.9% in September 1999, but rose gradually
thereafter to stand at 1.5% in December2000. These developments should be seen
against the background of somewhat stronger
but still moderate wage developments and a
weak pass-through of earlier increases in
import prices. One reason for this is thatindirect effects of changes in import pricesappear gradually and with a lag, implying that
the path of inflation in 2000 was stillattenuated by indirect effects from the
decline in oil and commodity prices up to
early 1999. Similarly, the pass-through of risesin import prices, and in particular of oilprices, in 1999 and 2000 will persist for some

time in 2001, even though oil pricesmoderated and the exchange rate of theeuro appreciated at the end of 2000.
Tighter competition may be anotherfactor preventing a stronger pass-through ofthe sustained oil price increase in 1999 and

2000.In particular, the developments in non-energy
industrial goods prices indicated a limitedpass-through from import prices in 2000. Theannual rate of change in non-energy industrial
goods prices remained broadly stable ataround 0.6% from April 1999 to August 2000.However, towards the end of 2000 there
was an increase in the year-on-year rate to1.1% in December 2000, partly reflecting thepass-through of a rise in the industrial
producer prices for consumer goods. As aresult of these developments, the annual
average rate of change in this HICP
component rose from 0.6% in 1999 to 0.7%in 2000.The annual rate of increase in processed food
prices stood at 1.1% on average in 2000,up slightly from 0.9% in 1999. The rate of
increase in this component remained closeto 1.0% in the first half of 2000 beforeincreasing gradually to stand at 1.4% in
December 2000.Throughout 2000, the annual rate of changein services prices remained broadly stable ataround the annual average of 1.7%, and was
only slightly higher than the average of 1.5%
in 1999. The stable rate of increase in 2000
reflected counteracting factors. On the one

hand, generally moderate wage developmentscontributed to the sustained low increase inservices prices. Moreover, deregulation in the
telecommunications sector combined withincreased competition exerted downwardpressure on telecommunications prices (see
Box 3 entitled ﬁPrice effects of regulatoryreforms in euro area network industriesﬂ).
On the other hand, some indirect effects
associated with a rise in import prices led tohigher prices in the sub-components for
transport and recreation services.Higher import prices led to a rise inproducer pricesAs a result of the rise in oil prices and thedecline in the exchange rate of the euro, theannual rate of increase in import prices,measured by import unit value indices, was
significantly higher in 2000 than in 1999 (see
Chart 13). According to the latest availabledata, the year-on-year rate of change in
import prices stood at 25.5% in November2000. These developments have also affectedeuro area industrial producer prices, which
increased strongly in 2000 Œ their annual rateof change rose from an average of -0.4% in
1999 to 5.4% in 2000, mainly owing to a rise

in intermediate goods prices reflectingincreases in oil prices. However, theproducer prices of consumer goods
contributed as well, albeit to a lesser extent,with an annual rate of increase rising from0.2% on average in 1999 to 1.5% in 2000.Wage developments remained moderateThe general outcome of wage settlements inthe euro area in 2000 was that broadly
moderate increases were granted. Underlyingthis overall outcome, various factors exerteda dampening influence on wage settlements,33Box 3Price effects of regulatory reforms in euro area network industriesOver the last couple of years, the EU has pursued an ambitious regulatory reform programme to introducecompetition in network industries and to create a single European market in these sectors. This in turn shouldresult in increased efficiency and lower prices for users. Network industries depend on an infrastructure withnatural monopoly characteristics, e.g. the distribution networks for electricity, gas and water. As it is not
normally economically viable to construct competing networks, competition can only be introduced in thesesectors if an appropriate regulatory framework ensures non-discriminatory access to the network for all actualand potential suppliers. This box focuses on the price effects of regulatory reforms in the telecommunications,
electricity and gas sectors during the period from 1998 to 2000. At the end of 2000 regulatory reforms in othernetwork industries, such as postal services and water, were still being discussed at the EU level.There has been significant progress in the liberalisation of the telecommunications sector in the euro areaalthough a number of implementation issues, such as access to the local telephone market and the cross-
subsidisation of services by the dominant national companies, remain unresolved in some countries. For theelectricity and gas industries the reform timetables adopted by the Council of Ministers allow for a gradualopening-up of the market over a period of up to ten years. The Electricity Market Directive of 1996 called for
an initial liberalisation of 25% of the market in 1999, with this proportion rising to around one-third by 2003.The Gas Market Directive of 1998 requires Member States to open up a minimum of 20% of the market by2000. This share is due to increase to 33% by 2008. The European Commission regularly compiles information
on the progress made with regard to the implementation of these Directives. On the basis of this information, itappears that in 2000 around 56% of the euro area electricity market (including that of Greece) and around 58%of the euro area gas market were opened up, thus clearly exceeding the minimum requirements set for
individual countries in the Directives. According to the current plans of the Member States, these shares areset to increase to 68% (for electricity) and 76% (for gas) by 2003. However, it is important to keep in mind thatthe legal opening-up of network industry markets is a necessary but not a sufficient precondition for the
establishment of competition in these markets. In particular, an appropriately designed regulatory frameworkis crucial to ensure competition in network industries.The chart below shows the developments in the euro area-wide HICP sub-indices for electricity and telephoneand telefax services as well as developments in the broader sub-indices to which they belong, i.e. energy andservices, during the period from 1998 to 2000. All sub-indices are shown relative to the overall HICP. Since
the liberalisation of European gas markets has started only recently, the sub-index for gas has not beenincluded in this chart. With regard to the telephone and telefax services sub-index, a marked downward trendcompared with the overall index is discernible from 1998 onwards; the consumer price fell by 11.7% from
December 1997 to December 2000. The electricity sub-index also shows a downward trend, but only since1999. However, the downward movement was interrupted by an increase in energy taxation in some countries,and the general rise in energy prices also led to a slight rise in electricity prices in late 2000. As a result, the
electricity price index for the euro area as a whole only fell by 0.5% from December 1998 to December 2000,equivalent to a fall of around 4.7% relative to the overall euro area HICP. Some of the price declines,especially in the electricity sector, were triggered by the actions of public regulators. In particular, during the
first phase of regulatory reform, in which competition may still be limited or non-existent, some regulators tryto adjust tariffs gradually towards a market price by means of price caps. The combined decline in prices in thetelecommunications and electricity sectors directly reduced overall euro area HICP inflation by 0.1 percentage
point on average in 2000.It should be borne in mind that regulatory reform is only one of the factors determining price developments innetwork industries. Other important elements include technological progress (in the case oftelecommunications), tax changes and gas and other fuel price variations (in the case of electricity).34Nevertheless, the recent trend in prices in these industries suggests that regulatory reform has indeed exerteddownward pressure on prices in these sectors.Further progress with regard to the implementation of the regulatory reforms in the telecommunicationssector, together with the creation of single European electricity and gas markets with cross-border competition,
should result in further price falls and, in the coming years, may reduce the substantial price differences acrossMember States which exist at present. The downward trend in prices is likely to continue throughout the
regulatory reform process itself and to go on until the industries concerned have adjusted to the newcompetitive environment and consumers to having a choice of supplier. The timing of the effects within thereform period depends largely on external factors, in particular the legal framework for the reforms. Concerning
inflation in the euro area economy as a whole, regulatory reform is likely to have a temporary downwardeffect. In the electricity and gas sectors, the markets for private households are the last to be liberalised. Asubstantial part of the potential decreases in consumer prices in these two sectors are therefore likely to take
place towards the end of the reform process. However, as there is no legal obligation for Member States togrant households the right to a free choice of electricity and gas suppliers, as they do for industrial users, somecountries do not envisage liberalising this segment of the market. This in turn is likely to limit the overall

consumer price effect of regulatory reform in these sectors.such as employment policies and workingtime arrangements as well as reductions intaxes and social security contributions in
several countries, which social partners took

into account in the negotiations. In addition,the pattern of wage increases in the individualeuro area Member States tended to reflectthe cyclical situation of the domesticeconomy at the time the agreements weresigned. In particular, in some countries therewas some upward tendency in wage
settlements as a result of robust economicgrowth, temporarily higher inflation rates and,in some cases, signs of labour market tightness.
Price level relative to the overall HICP in the euro area(index December 1997=100; monthly data)
Source: Eurostat.Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4
199819992000
809010011012080
90
100110120electricityenergytelephone and telefax servicesservices35In the course of 2000, actual wage growthremained generally moderate. However,
while growth in compensation per employeestood at 2.2% on average in the first threequarters of 2000, which was 0.2 percentage

point higher than in 1999, growth in totalhourly labour costs rose to 3.8% on averagein the first three quarters of 2000, up from
2.2% in 1999. During 2000, total hourly
labour costs were influenced by severalspecific developments such as one-off
payments in the first quarter of the year inseveral large Member States, and changes innational legal frameworks, in particular, the

working time reduction in France. Moreover,special factors may also have contributed tothe difference between growth in
compensation per employee and total hourlylabour costs. For example, in Germany andthe Netherlands, there were fewer working
days in 2000 than in 1999. This calendar effect
had a temporary upward impact on the
increase in hourly labour costs in 2000.While underlying wage growth remainedmoderate, growth in unit labour costs declined
to 0.8% on average in the first three quarters of2000, down from 1.2% on average in 1999. This
decline mainly reflected a cyclical pick-up in
productivity to 1.4% on average in the firstthree quarters of 2000, up from 0.8% in 1999.
Inflation differentials among euro areacountries widenedThe euro area economies have experienceda considerable degree of convergence of
inflation rates during the past decade.However, it appears that inflation dispersionamong the euro area countries Œ as indicated

by some commonly used measures, such asspreads between the highest and lowestobservations as well as standard deviations Œ
has increased since mid-1997 and remainedrelatively high in 2000.The widest HICP inflation differentials acrosscountries have emerged in product groups suchas energy, services and processed food and may
be explained as follows. First, with regard toenergy price inflation, the clear upward trend indivergence appears to have been caused by the
steep rise in oil prices and the decline in theexchange rate of the euro up to November2000, against a background of differing weights
for this component, percentages of excise dutiesin final energy prices and trade structures amongthe euro area countries. Second, the wider
dispersion in respect of the rate of increase inservices prices in 2000 may be related toincreasing differences in unit labour cost
developments, partly caused by differences inwage increases and national cyclical positions.To some extent, this also reflects the priceChart 13Consumer, producer and import prices in the euro area(annual percentage changes; monthly data)Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1)Excluding construction.

2)Unit value indices refer to transactions between the euro area and the rest of the world; calculations are based on three-mon
thcentred moving averages.19961997199819992000
-3-2-1012345
6
7-12-8-4048121620
24
28import unit value index (right-hand scale) 2)overall HICP (left-hand scale)industrial producer prices (left-hand scale) 1)36effects of uneven progress in regulatory reformsin labour markets and network industries
(telecommunications and utilities) as well as a

catching-up of living standards in certain euro
area countries. Moreover, higher oil prices mayhave been passed on to prices for transport
services to varying degrees. Third, the higherdispersion in price increases for processed food
in 2000 is partly due to indirect tax rate hikes in
one Member State. Finally, various changes inadministered prices at the national level also
appear to have led to a widening of inflation
spreads last year.Dispersion measures also point to relativelylarge differences in unprocessed food priceincreases, owing to this component™s traditional
vulnerability to weather-related shocks and
seasonal patterns, although there is no clear
trend in the dispersion. By contrast,
developments in non-energy industrial goodshave been characterised by small and stableprice increase differentials across euro area
countries. This seems to reflect the effect of
competition in the tradable goods sector,especially in the context of a Single Market with
a single currency.
4 Output, demand and labour market developments
Strong GDP growth in 2000 as a whole, but
some slowdown in the second half of theyearEconomic activity in the euro area started torecover in the second half of 1999, followinga slowdown related to the emerging markets
crisis, and euro area growth continued to behigh in 2000. Although unfavourable factors,such as a prolonged and steep increase in oil
prices, seem to have dampened growthsomewhat in the second half of 2000, the
rise in GDP for the year as a whole was the
largest since 1990.According to Eurostat, real GDP increasedby 3.4% on average in 2000, following agrowth rate of 2.5% in 1999 (see Table 2).However, activity slowed from an average

quarter-on-quarter growth rate of around
1% in the second half of 1999 to an averageof 0.8% quarter-on-quarter in the first half of
2000, and to 0.6% in the second half of theyear. Year-on-year growth increased to 3.7%in the second quarter of 2000 and declined
thereafter to 3.0% in the last quarter. Box 4reviews the main characteristics of GDPgrowth in the euro area in recent years.Real GDP growth supported by domesticdemandAs in 1999, strong growth in domesticdemand provided the most importantcontribution to GDP growth in 2000 (seeChart 14). For the year as a whole, thecontribution from domestic demand was2.7 percentage points, compared with

3.0 percentage points in 1999.Throughout the year, growth in domesticdemand remained robust. However, growthin private consumption and, to a lesser
Chart 14Contributions to quarterly real GDPgrowth in the euro area(quarterly percentage point contributions; seasonally adjusted)Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1)Percentage change compared with the previous quarter.
19992000
-0.50.00.51.0
1.5-0.50.00.51.0
1.5domestic demandnet exportsreal GDP 1)37Box 4The main characteristics of GDP growth in the euro area in recent years
While the average rate of growth in euro area GDP in the five-year period from 1992 to 1997 was 1.5%, GDPhas risen strongly in recent years, by 2.9% on average over the period from 1998 to 2000 (see the table below).Over the past three years, year-on-year GDP growth varied between a low of 1.9% in the first quarter of 1999and a high of 3.7% in the second quarter of 2000. These fluctuations in the rate of growth of GDP were largely
accounted for by substantial variations in the contribution of net trade to GDP growth, while growth indomestic demand remained broadly stable throughout the three years, this being a key factor behind thestrength of growth in euro area GDP during this period.Since 1998 growth in domestic demand has been 3.1% per year on average, after having been relativelysubdued in the previous part of the 1990s, rising by an annual average of only 1.1% between 1992 and 1997.
Domestic demand was fostered by strong and sustained growth in private consumption over the past threeyears, at 2.8% per year on average, a much higher level than the average of 1.2% recorded between 1992 and1997. Strong growth in employment underpinned consumer confidence and contributed to the growth in
household disposable income. The upturn in growth at the end of 1997 was accompanied by an increase in therate of growth in employment, which was then broadly sustained at high levels over the period from 1998 to2000. Besides strong growth in activity, moderate wage increases in this period contributed to maintaining a
robust pace of job creation, especially in the services sector. By increasing price transparency and eliminatingexchange rate movements between Member States, Monetary Union may have raised employers™ and
employees™ awareness of the importance of maintaining competitiveness by moderating wage increases.
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1)Annual rates: percentage change compared with the same period a year earlier.

2)Quarterly rates: percentage change compared with the previous quarter.

3)As a contribution to real GDP growth; in percentage points.

4)Including acquisitions less disposals of valuables.

5)Exports and imports cover goods and services and include internal cross-border trade within the euro area. Intra-euro area
trade is not cancelled out in import and export figures used in national accounts. Consequently, these data are not fully
comparable with balance of payments data.6)Also includes hunting and forestry.
Table 2Composition of real GDP growth in the euro area(percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated; seasonally adjusted)Annual rates1)Quarterly rates 2)
1998199920001999200020002000200019992000200020002000
Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q4 Q1Q2Q3Q4
Real gross domestic product2.82.53.43.33.53.73.23.01.00.90.80.50.7
of which:
Domestic demand3.43.12.82.92.63.22.82.50.80.60.80.40.6
Private consumption3.12.82.62.72.63.12.42.10.70.80.80.20.3
Government consumption1.01.61.61.61.71.81.41.60.40.60.30.10.6

Gross fixed capital formation4.85.34.65.55.74.94.03.90.61.80.61.10.4
Changes in inventories 3), 4)0.4-0.0-0.0-0.1-0.5-0.00.20.10.2-0.30.20.10.2
Net exports 3)
-0.5-0.50.60.40.90.60.50.50.10.3-0.10.10.1
Exports 5)
7.04.711.710.012.811.411.211.63.03.02.02.83.3
Imports 5)
9.56.710.49.110.510.110.210.72.72.22.32.63.2
Real gross value added:Agriculture and fishing 6)
1.82.51.53.92.71.01.50.80.50.1-0.91.7-0.1
Industry1.91.63.63.34.23.93.43.00.71.50.50.70.3
Services3.22.73.42.83.23.43.33.50.81.10.70.70.9
38Gross fixed capital formation also contributed to the strength of domestic demand, rising by around 5% peryear over the period from 1998 to 2000, whereas it increased at low rates in the period from 1992 to 1997 (andeven decreased strongly in 1993). Investment projects were encouraged by companies needing to updateequipment after several years of limited growth in investment. Favourable demand and financing conditions
also encouraged investment spending. Moreover, investors™ confidence in prolonged robust growth was
enhanced by the long-term commitment of monetary authorities to maintaining price stability and of fiscalauthorities to ensuring long-term sustainability of public finances in the context of the Stability and Growth

Pact. Finally, the ongoing development and integration of capital markets within the euro area improvedaccess to funding for investors.By contrast with broadly stable growth in domestic demand, the pattern of net trade in goods and services wasmore varied over the past three years, leading to variations in GDP growth. The contribution from net trade in
goods and services to year-on-year GDP growth was negative in 1998 and early 1999; it turned positive in thecourse of 1999 and continued to have a positive impact on GDP growth in 2000, although it declined in thecourse of the year. Different factors account for the decline in the contribution of net exports to GDP growth in
1998 and early 1999, on the one hand, and that during 2000, on the other. With regard to the first period, thecrisis in emerging markets and the ensuing general slowdown in world trade growth had a negative impact onvolumes of euro area exports of goods and services. Eurostat™s data on volumes of trade in goods only showthat the slowdown in the trade of goods within the euro area was much less pronounced and briefer than that intrade with non-euro area countries, in line with sustained growth in domestic demand. In volume terms,growth in exports of goods and services (including intra-euro area trade) declined from 12% year-on-year in
the first quarter of 1998 to 0.6% in the first quarter of 1999. Imports also slowed down over this period, but toa lesser extent (from 12.5% year-on-year in the first quarter of 1998 to 4.5% in the first quarter of 1999). Bycontrast, in 2000 growth rates in volumes of both imports and exports of goods and services (including intra-
euro area trade) increased sharply and their rate of growth has been broadly sustained since mid-1999.Therefore, at the end of 2000, year-on-year growth rates of export and import volumes were above 10%. Highgrowth in domestic activity stimulated demand for imports in 2000. As a result, by contrast with developments

in 1998 and early 1999, the strength of imports, rather than weakening exports, was at the origin of the declinein the contribution from net trade to GDP growth. In this respect, developments in imports in 2000 are afurther indication of the strength of final demand, especially exports and investment, the latter being favourable
to GDP growth in the medium term.Overall, the strength of domestic demand has been a key feature of the past few years. The establishment ofMonetary Union may have enhanced wage moderation, thereby contributing to favourable conditions for highand sustainable growth in domestic activity. Moreover, as illustrated by developments in 2000, a decline in thecontribution from net trade to GDP growth may be the result of high import volumes induced by strong
domestic economic activity rather than weak growth in exports.Contribution of domestic demand and net trade to GDP growth in the euro area1992-97199819992000
Average growth ofGDP1.52.82.53.4
Domestic demand1.13.43.12.8
Exports5.87.04.711.7

Imports4.49.56.710.4
Contribution to GDP growthDomestic demand1.03.33.02.7
Net trade0.5-0.5-0.50.6
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.39extent, in investment, although high for theyear as a whole, declined in the second halfof 2000. Changes in inventories made a
positive contribution to growth in domestic
demand in the latter part of the year.
In 2000, growth in private consumptionremained strong for the third consecutiveyear, at 2.6%, following 2.8% in 1999. High
growth in employment contributed both toincreases in income and to sustained
consumer confidence. The income of the self-
employed is also likely to have benefited fromthe high level of economic activity. In
addition, reductions in direct taxes had a
positive impact on growth in householddisposable income in 2000. However, despitethese positive factors, growth in private
consumption fell significantly in the secondhalf of 2000 to 0.2% quarter-on-quarter on
average, compared with 0.8% in the first half
of the year. The lower growth in privateconsumption can to some extent beexplained by the losses in real income related
to the increase in oil prices.However, other indicators pointed to someresilience of growth in private consumptionto higher oil prices. First, consumer
confidence remained high at the end
of last year. According to the EuropeanCommission Consumer Survey, consumerconfidence reached a record high in August
2000. It declined slightly in the autumn, butremained close to record levels at the end ofthe year. Second, retail sales of household
equipment goods were robust throughoutmost of the year. These sales were likely tobe the hardest hit by the losses in real income
following the increase in oil prices, as theyentail high expenditure which can often bepostponed. Further increases in sales of

such large items are consistent with anoptimistic assessment by households of futuredevelopments.With regard to government consumption,growth in 2000 stood at 1.6%, in line with the
average growth rate of 1.5% seen in the 1990s.For 2000 as a whole capital formationincreased by 4.6%, compared with 5.3% in1999. Following three years of robust growth

in gross fixed capital formation, its ratio toGDP increased from a low point at 20.1%
in 1997 to around 21.5% last year. High
growth in gross fixed capital formation wasmaintained throughout 2000, despite theworsening terms of trade which tended to
dampen growth in profit margins. Growth incapital formation was encouraged by strongactivity both inside and outside the euro area.
According to the European CommissionBusiness Survey, confidence in themanufacturing sector rose steadily to reach a
record high in June 2000. It declinedthereafter, but remained at high levels.
Investment projects were encouraged by
relatively tight production capacity. Capacityutilisation rates in the manufacturing sectorincreased continuously during the year, and

at the end of 2000 were only slightly belowthe peaks reached in the late 1980s.Moreover, high profitability, built up over the
past few years, together with favourablefinancing conditions, ensured that firms hadthe financial resources to invest. One other
factor which probably raised total spendingon new capital in the euro area was themore intensive use of information and
communications equipment. Finally, availableevidence on the split between housing and
business investment suggests that the
strength of investment last year is likely to
have been accounted for mostly by high
growth in investment in machinery and
equipment.The contribution of changes in inventories toGDP growth was zero for 2000 as a whole.
Caution is warranted when interpreting dataon inventories, as they have sometimes
been revised substantially in the past. Thecontribution of changes in inventories wasrelatively high in the latter part of 2000,
thereby partly offsetting the slowdown in finaldomestic demand. According to the EuropeanCommission Business Survey, levels of stocks
in the industrial sector were relatively lowin 2000, although they increased during theyear.40Euro area trade in goods and servicesincreased substantiallyVolumes of both exports and imports ofgoods and services Œ including intra-euro area
trade Œ increased very rapidly last year. For
2000 as a whole, the contribution of netexports to GDP growth was positive at 0.6percentage point, having been negative in
1999, at -0.5 percentage point.However, the annual figures obscure agradual decline in the contribution of nettrade to GDP growth in the course of 2000,
as the rate of growth in import volumes
started to approach that of exports. As aconsequence, from the second quarter of
2000 onwards, net trade tended to
contribute less to GDP growth.Services sector activity supported by strong
growth in domestic demandData on value added by main sector of activitywere compiled by the ECB and first publishedin the May 2000 issue of the Monthly Bulletin.
These data provide useful information for ananalysis of economic developments at thesectoral level, notably for the services sector.
In January 2001 Eurostat first publishedestimates of value added by main sector ofactivity.Growth of real gross value added in theservices sector was strong in 2000, at 3.4%,
compared with 2.7% in 1999. Within the
services sector, market services (whichinclude retail and wholesale trade, financial

and real estate services, and transport andtelecommunications services) experiencedthe most rapid growth rates at around
4.5% year-on-year in 2000, while the growthrate of public administration and social
services was around 1%. The upturn in activity
in market services was partly accounted for
by the recovery in the industrial sector, whichbenefited sectors such as transport and
financial services. The overall strength ofprivate consumption last year is also likely tohave fostered growth in the provision ofservices to households. Strong growth in
services, which account for around two-thirdsof value added in the euro area, was an
essential factor in the high economic growthachieved last year.Industrial production recovered in 2000
As has been the case in the past few years,growth in industrial activity was significantlyaffected by external developments last year:
it recovered strongly in the first half of 2000as world economic growth rose. Moreover,euro area exporters™ competitiveness was
enhanced by moderate increases in wagesand domestic prices and by the depreciationof the euro in the course of 2000. However,
in the second half of 2000, world economicactivity did not accelerate further, therebyno longer boosting growth in euro area
industrial production, which was dampenedby the prolonged increase in oil prices.As both trade and domestic activity picked upin the course of 1999, growth in industrialproduction rose to high levels in the second
half of 1999 and the first half of 2000. Year-on-
year growth in industrial production excludingconstruction rose markedly throughout the first
half of 2000, rising to 8.2% in May 2000. Itstarted to decline thereafter, thereby followingthe pattern of industrial confidence shown by
the European Commission Business Survey. Thesharp increase in the growth rate of industrialproduction in December 2000 is likely to
have been at least partially accounted for byfavourable working day effects. For 2000 as awhole, industrial production increased by 5.4%,
its fastest rate of growth since 1985, thefirst year for which official euro area dataon industrial production are available (see
Table 3).Owing to a relatively high level of energyconsumption by the industrial sectorcompared with the overall services sector,industrial production is likely to have been
affected more significantly by the sharpincrease in energy prices in 2000. Withregard to the impact of the depreciation of
41the euro, the negative consequences of higherinput costs are likely to have been at leastpartly offset by improved competitiveness forexporters of manufactured goods. The extent
to which these two opposite effects balanceout varies between industrial sectors anddepends on the share of imported goods in
their inputs relative to production and theshare of their production which is exportedoutside the euro area.Within industry, the slowdown in the secondhalf of the year was most marked in the
intermediate goods sector. For 2000 as awhole, production in this sector rose by 5.2%,following 2.3% in 1999. Year-on-year growth
increased to 8.9% in May 2000, but then
declined. Demand for intermediate goodsseems to have been sustained, in view of
strong growth in the production of capitalgoods, but high oil prices accounted for theslowdown later in the year. Growth in the
production of capital goods remainedremarkably strong at 9.2% in 2000, its highestrate for at least a decade. Although similar

rates of growth have been seen in the past,they have never been sustained for such along period. Growth in the production of
capital goods was also sustained throughoutthe year, underpinned by the strength ofinvestment in the euro area. In particular, theproduction of electronics and information andcommunications goods increased by around20% in 2000. Growth in the production ofdurable consumer goods was also strong in

2000, at 7.1%, following 3.1% in 1999, in linewith robust retail sales of householdequipment goods.In the construction sector, growthmoderated somewhat, as the effect of tax
incentives which had bolstered activity in1999 started to fade. The value addedincreased by 1.3% in 2000, following 1.9% in
1999. Finally, the value added in agricultureand fishing rose by 1.5% in 2000, after 2.5% in1999.Sustained employment growth in 2000
On the basis of available national data,employment in the euro area as a whole is
estimated to have increased at a slightly fasterpace in 2000 than in 1999, i.e. at 2.0%compared with 1.7%. The upturn in economic

activity from the beginning of 1999 stimulatednet job creation throughout the second halfof 1999 and in 2000, leading to the largest
increases in euro area employment since thestart of the 1990s. Employment growth in2000 was also underpinned by continuedTable 3Industrial production in the euro area
(percentage changes)Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.1)Annual rates: percentage change compared with the same period a year earlier by using data adjusted for variations in the
number of working days.2)Quarterly rates: percentage change compared with the previous quarter by using seasonally and working day adjusted data.
Annual rates 1)Quarterly rates 2)
1998199920001999200020002000200019992000200020002000
Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q4 Q1Q2Q3Q4
Total industry excl. construct.4.31.95.44.34.86.05.75.21.70.52.11.01.8
Manufacturing4.71.95.84.85.06.36.15.81.21.01.81.81.4
by main industrial groupings:
Intermediate goods4.02.35.25.65.66.25.04.21.50.81.40.91.5
Capital goods6.61.59.22.86.98.710.110.91.62.32.82.93.4
Consumer goods2.71.82.63.91.43.92.92.41.0-2.12.70.91.4
Durable consumer goods6.33.17.15.77.68.37.35.31.81.71.81.31.8

Non-durable consumer goods2.01.51.73.50.02.92.11.70.9-2.92.90.81.4
42wage moderation and further labourmarket policies. It should be noted, however,that in the summer of 2000 there was a
significant revision of the entire Germanemployment data series. Consequently, euroarea employment growth has been revised
upwards, particularly for the period since1996.Higher employment growth was observedin the two main sectors of the economy(see Table 4), closely following the sectoral
growth pattern described above. With year-on-year growth rates of above 2.6% in the
first three quarters of the year, the services
sector clearly remained the main driving forcebehind job creation in 2000, fuelled bysustained growth in domestic demand.
Employment growth in the industrial sectoralso experienced more positive developmentsin 2000. Indeed, after a modest increase in

1999, employment growth in total industry
picked up in the first three quarters of 2000.This was largely the result of a strong
positive contribution from the constructionsector in the first quarter of the year, while,in the second and third quarters, there was
a significant improvement in employment
growth in the manufacturing sector. Bycontrast, the fall in job creation in theagricultural sector continued in 2000, albeitat a significantly slower pace than in recentyears.Pace of decline in unemployment broadlymaintained in 2000The gradual decline in euro areaunemployment which started in July 1997continued in 2000, at a broadly similar paceto that in 1999 (see Chart 15). Box 5 reviews
the decline in unemployment from a longer-term perspective. The standardised rate ofunemployment fell to 8.7% at the end of 2000,
compared with 9.6% in December 1999. Inthe first half of 2000 the decline was sharp,with the unemployment rate falling by nearly
0.1 percentage point each month. In thesecond half of the year the decline inunemployment slowed down. All in all, for
the second consecutive year, the number of
unemployed people in the euro area fellby an average of more than 1 million in 2000.
By the end of 2000 there were around
11.4 million unemployed people in the euroarea.Table 4Labour market developments in the euro area
(annual percentage changes and percentages)1998199920001998199819991999199919992000200020002000
Q3Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Labour force0.80.8.0.80.70.90.70.80.81.01.11.0.
Employment1.61.7.1.71.91.81.51.71.71.92.22.0.
Agriculture 1)
-1.1-2.8.-1.4-2.2-3.6-2.6-2.7-2.4-1.1-1.2-1.1.
Industry 2)
0.70.5.0.90.80.60.40.30.60.80.91.0.
Œexcl. construction1.20.3.1.30.90.9-0.10.00.30.20.91.0.
Œconstruction0.20.8.-0.10.8-0.31.31.01.22.61.31.3.
Services 3)
2.12.5.2.32.72.72.42.62.42.62.92.7.
Rates of unemployment 4)
Total10.99.99.010.810.610.310.19.99.69.49.18.98.7
Under 25 years21.319.117.321.120.820.119.318.918.218.017.417.116.7

25 years and over9.48.77.99.39.18.98.88.68.48.27.97.87.6
Sources: National data and ECB calculations for labour force data; Eurostat for employment and unemployment data.1)Also includes fishing, hunting and forestry.

2)Includes manufacturing, construction, mining and quarrying, electricity, gas and water supply.

3)Excludes extra-territorial bodies and organisations.

4)Percentage of the labour force according to ILO recommendations.
43Box 5The decline in unemployment from a longer-term perspectiveSince June 1997 the euro area unemployment rate has fallen by 2.9 percentage points, i.e. at an average rateof around 0.2 percentage point per quarter, to stand at 8.7% in December 2000, which corresponds to11.4 million unemployed people. This reflects the economic upturn combined with sustained moderate wagedevelopments and, in addition, the effect of reforms in the euro area labour market. The decline since 1997 has
been the strongest and the most sustained by far since that observed in the late 1980s. It follows a period inwhich the unemployment rate remained at very high levels between early 1994 and mid-1997 after havingincreased sharply from a low of 7.8% in mid-1990 to a peak of 11.7% in early 1994. In absolute terms,
unemployment has declined by around 3.5 million since June 1997, wiping out two-thirds of the sharpincrease recorded from mid-1990 to June 1997. This box reviews the decline in unemployment in the euro areasince 1997 in greater detail, focusing in particular on the age, gender, skills and duration patterns.Strong employment growth largely accounts for the decline in unemploymentThe decline in unemployment stemmed from the vigorous growth in employment. Total employment has beengrowing at an average year-on-year rate of 1.8% since mid-1997, compared with a decline of 0.2% between
mid-1990 and mid-1997. This corresponds to an increase of around 7 million, whereas earlier in the 1990s, by
comparison, employment fell by over 1 million. It is worth noting that the decline in unemployment took place
against a background of remarkable growth in the labour force. Mainly on account of an increasing participationrate, labour force growth has accelerated since 1997, standing at an average annual rate of 0.9%, compared
with 0.4% earlier in the decade.
The recent positive employment performance was to a large extent the result of the robust economic growth inthe second half of the 1990s. However, there are also signs that economic expansion has become more labour-intensive compared with the previous period of strong growth in the late 1980s. This seems to be confirmedwhen employment is measured in terms of full-time equivalents rather than simply by the number of people
employed. One explanation could be that, by contrast with the late 1980s, real labour cost developments haveremained moderate during the current upturn, owing to wage moderation and cuts in employers™ social
security contributions for certain groups in some countries. Moreover, the favourable employment
developments should also have been facilitated by labour market reforms, such as measures to promoteflexible and part-time jobs, financial incentives to employ low-skilled workers and tighter entitlement conditionsfor unemployment benefits.Standardised unemployment rates in the euro area(as a percentage of the labour force)19901991199219931994199519961997199819992000
Total7.98.29.210.811.611.311.511.510.99.99.0
Males6.16.47.39.19.89.49.89.89.18.37.4
Females10.510.911.913.314.214.014.014.013.312.211.1
Under 25 years16.616.918.522.223.623.323.923.221.319.117.3
25 years and above6.26.67.58.99.79.59.89.99.48.77.9
Source: Eurostat.Note: Standardised unemployment rates are only available from July 1990.44All groups, including those with high levels of unemployment, are benefiting from the improvements inthe labour marketAll groups, in particular those most affected by high unemployment, such as women, young people, olderpeople, the low-skilled and the long-term unemployed, have experienced a decline in unemployment since
1997.First, the female unemployment rate fell by 3.4 percentage points from June 1997 to 10.7% in December 2000,compared with a fall of 2.6 percentage points to 7.2% in December 2000 for male unemployment. This may beexplained by the marked rise in employment in the services sector, where around 80% of female employmentis concentrated and where part-time employment is most widespread, by the increasing proportion of women
with tertiary education and by tax relief for childcare expenses in some countries.Second, although youth unemployment (among people aged under 25) in the euro area is still approximatelytwice as high as the overall unemployment rate, it has decreased sharply, from 23.5% in June 1997 to 16.6% inDecember 2000. This is all the more noticeable because the youth participation rate also increased, afterhaving decreased steadily from 1987 to 1997. The cuts in social security contributions in many countries,
along with the easing of regulations for fixed-term contracts and the introduction of initiatives aimed atpromoting part-time employment, are likely to have contributed directly to raising the employability of youngpeople, especially for those who are low-skilled or do not have any work experience. The unemployment rate
for low-skilled workers indeed decreased by 1.5 percentage points from 1997 to 12.5% in 1999. Moreover,special youth schemes, such as on-the-job training, placement assistance, apprenticeships and employmentsubsidies, may also have contributed. Overall, around one-third of the total decrease in unemployment is
attributable to this group, even though it represented only 12% of the labour force. The unemployment rate forolder people (aged between 55 and 59 years), which has more than doubled over the past two decades, fell byover 1 percentage point from 1997 to 11.1% in 1999.
Third, the number of long-term unemployed appears to have decreased faster than overall unemployment.Data for 2000 are not yet available, but the proportion of those unemployed for more than a year to total
unemployment decreased by 2.4 percentage points between 1997 and 1999, after rising sharply earlier in the1990s. Long-term unemployment probably benefited from the economic recovery, but also from labourmarket reforms aimed in particular at improving the employability of the most vulnerable groups and
increasing work incentives. However, long-term unemployment still accounts for around half of total
unemployment.Further falls in unemployment require structural reform and continuing wage moderationOverall, the decline in unemployment since 1997 has been significant. A sustainable continuation of thisdecline in the coming years will necessitate, in addition to wage moderation, ongoing reforms in the labourmarkets of the euro area. This is needed all the more urgently because of rising recruitment difficulties in somesectors and possible risks that some countries will experience labour shortages in the medium term. In
particular, the coexistence of still high unemployment and numerous unfilled vacancies may suggest amismatch between labour supply and demand, which may be due to, inter alia, a skills mismatch, geographicalmismatch, inactivity traps and inadequate wage structures. This situation would call for targeted measures
aimed at the underlying source of the mismatch, such as a training and education policy, the reduction offactors limiting labour mobility, and incentives for unemployed or inactive people to re-enter the labourmarket.45The decline in unemployment wasaccompanied by a marked increase in thelabour force. Labour force growth is
estimated to have risen slightly, from 0.8% in1999 to around 1% in 2000. This increase
may be attributable at least in part to the
economic upturn which, by increasing thelikelihood of finding a job, provides a greaterincentive to participate in the labour market.
It is also related to a shift in the compositionof the population, which is increasing the
relative weight of middle-age groups, the
participation rate of which is generally higherthan that of other groups.
The breakdown by age shows that althoughyouth unemployment was still twice as highas the total unemployment rate, overall, it
decreased in 2000, from 18.0% in December1999 to 16.6% in December 2000. Thisdecrease was nevertheless slightly smaller
than that in 1999, when youth unemploymentfell by more than 340,000, compared with311,000 in 2000, and could be indicative of a
continued increase in the participation rateof this age group. However, around a quarterof the total decline in unemployment was still

attributable to the fall in youth unemploymentin 2000, even though this group representedonly around 12% of the total labour force. By
contrast, the decline in unemployment for
those aged 25 years and above was greater in2000 than in 1999. This rate fell from 8.4% in
December 1999 to 7.6% in December 2000,i.e. a fall of 820,000 in the number ofunemployed people (compared with 725,000
in 1999). In 2000, both male and femaleunemployment rates declined, from 8.3%
in 1999 to 7.4% in 2000 for males and

from 12.2% to 11.1% for females, and thegap between average male and femaleunemployment rates narrowed slightly. The
continued convergence of unemploymentrates across age and gender groups, whichcould reflect a gradual reduction of the
mismatch in the labour market, wasnonetheless slightly less pronounced than in1999. Finally, the dispersion of unemployment
rates between euro area countries decreasedfurther in 2000, with the most significantreductions generally occurring in the
countries with the highest levels ofunemployment.5Fiscal developments
Table 5, column 5). Sales of UMTS licences
contributed 1.1% of GDP to the improvementin the euro area aggregate budget balance.
Even excluding these one-off windfallproceeds, the budget balance improved in alleuro area countries as a result of the impact
of strong economic growth on tax revenueand unemployment-related expenditure. On
average, a deficit-to-GDP ratio of 0.8% ofBudget balances improved in 2000The budget balances of euro area
governments continued to improve in 2000,mainly as a result of the sale of UMTS licencesin a number of countries and because of

cyclical factors. According to the latestdata available from Eurostat, a surplus of0.3% of GDP was achieved on average (see
Chart 15Unemployment in the euro area(monthly data; seasonally adjusted)Source: Eurostat.1994199619982000
-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1.5
2.02.53.08.59.09.510.010.511.011.512.0% of the labour force (right-hand scale)annual change in millions (left-hand scale)46General government surplus (+) or deficit (-)19971998199920002000
includingexcluding
UMTSUMTS
proceedsproceeds
Euro area-2.6-2.1-1.20.3-0.8
Belgium-1.9-0.9-0.70.00.0
Germany-2.7-2.1-1.41.3-1.2

Spain-3.2-2.6-1.2-0.3-0.4

France-3.0-2.7-1.6-1.3-1.3
Ireland0.72.12.14.54.5
Italy-2.7-2.8-1.8-0.3-1.5

Luxembourg3.63.24.75.35.3

The Netherlands-1.1-0.71.02.01.3
Austria-1.7-2.3-2.1-1.1-1.5
Portugal-2.7-2.2-2.0-1.4-1.7

Finland-1.51.31.86.76.7
Table 5Fiscal positions in the euro area(as a percentage of GDP)General government gross debt1997199819992000
Euro area74.873.172.069.7
Belgium125.3119.8116.4110.9

Germany60.960.761.160.2
Spain66.764.763.460.6
France59.359.758.758.0

Ireland65.155.050.139.1

Italy120.1116.2114.5110.2
Luxembourg6.06.46.05.3
The Netherlands70.066.863.256.3

Austria64.763.964.762.8

Portugal59.155.355.053.8
Finland54.148.846.944.0
Sources: Eurostat and the ECB for euro area aggregates.Note: Data are based on the ESA 95.GDP was recorded (net of UMTS proceeds),compared with 1.2% in 1999 (see Table 5,

column 6). The deficit targets of the 1999/2000 updated stability programmes were metin virtually all euro area countries.
Underlying the overall picture for the euroarea are some considerable differences
between fiscal developments in the individualcountries. Ireland and Finland furtherincreased their budget surplus ratios
substantially in 2000, by more than2 percentage points, aided by high economicgrowth and, in the case of Ireland, by anexceptional one-off factor in 1999 which hada downward effect on the surplus. In all other
euro area countries, balances improved by
0% to 1% of GDP. As a result, only fivecountries (Germany, France, Italy, Austria and
Portugal) showed a deficit excluding UMTSproceeds of above 0.5% of GDP in 2000,compared with seven countries in 1999.
Portugal, Austria and Italy have the highest
budget deficit ratios in the euro area andwere also among the countries which made
limited progress in consolidation. Spain and
Belgium achieved budgets near to or inbalance, while continued surpluses were47registered in four countries (Ireland,Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Finland).The euro area average debt-to-GDP ratiodecreased by 2.3 percentage points, to 69.7%.The debt ratio declined in all euro area
countries in 2000. The Netherlands, Belgium,Italy and Ireland reported debt ratiosdeclining by more than 4 percentage points.
Deficit-debt adjustments, reflecting amongother things financial transactions which leave
the deficit unaffected but have an impact

on debt, exerted an upward effect of0.3 percentage point on the euro area average
debt ratio in 2000. Among other factors, the
revaluation of foreign currency-denominateddebt contributed to this effect.Expansionary fiscal policies arising frominsufficient expenditure restraintThe improvement in the fiscal balancesexcluding UMTS proceeds was mainly due to
favourable economic developments whichboosted tax revenues and helped containprimary expenditure (expenditure excluding
interest expenditure) in 2000. However, theﬁgrowth dividendﬂ was largely used to finance
additional tax cuts and expenditure, rather

than for more rapid deficit reduction. In early2000 the expenditure-to-GDP ratio wasexpected to decline by around 1 percentage
point, owing to lower interest expenditure,lower unemployment benefits and a lowergovernment wage bill. On account of

additional spending, however, the decline in
the ratio was considerably smaller than
anticipated. This runs counter to the 2000
Broad Economic Policy Guidelines, whichrecommended that better than expectedgrowth be used to achieve safer budgetary
positions, rather than to raise expenditureor to lower taxes.Developments in the primary balance (budgetbalance excluding interest expenditure)indicate that fiscal policy actions in the
euro area did not contribute to budgetaryimprovements in 2000. After adjustmentfor UMTS proceeds, the primary surplus
improved only marginally. As thisimprovement was less than the effect ofeconomic growth on tax revenues and
unemployment expenditures would havesuggested, the cyclically adjusted primary
budget surplus declined slightly. At the
individual country level, this indicator showeda deterioration, particularly in Luxembourgand the Netherlands. The improvement was
relatively strong in Finland, which had alreadyachieved a sizeable surplus. The other euro
area countries reported only minor changes
in their cyclically adjusted primary balances.This suggests that many governmentshave halted or even reversed their fiscal
consolidation efforts.According to the budgetary plans ofthe euro area countries, the accommodatingstance of fiscal policies in 2000 will be furtherrelaxed in 2001. Significant further tax cuts
will be implemented in 2001, but thesewill not be complemented by sufficientprimary expenditure restraint. The budget
balance net of UMTS proceeds is expectedto remain broadly stable this year, while theprimary surplus will probably decline for the

first time since the early 1990s.Further consolidation and comprehensivestructural fiscal reform needed
Bearing in mind the expectation of sustained
economic growth in 2001, the expansionaryfiscal policies planned for this year in a number
of euro area countries are not conducive tocontaining aggregate demand and inflationarypressures. Particularly in the countries

experiencing high economic growth rates,
inflationary pressures will receive an additionalstimulus from expansionary fiscal policies. There
are, moreover, other compelling reasons forcountries to resume fiscal consolidation withvigour. The cyclically adjusted budgets of some
countries are significantly in deficit, and cannottherefore be seen as being ﬁclose to balanceor in surplusﬂ, as required by the Stability
and Growth Pact. In these cases, furtherconsolidation measures are required to achieve,as soon as possible, a sufficient margin for48automatic stabilisers to operate freely. Forseveral countries, high levels of governmentdebt should also be regarded as an argument
for continuing fiscal consolidation. Finally, thelonger-term sustainability of fiscal policiesrequires sufficient budgetary room to be
created to deal with the upward pressure which
ageing populations will place on governmentexpenditure in the medium and long term.Structural fiscal reform, which stimulatesemployment and growth, can help to support
fiscal consolidation and sustainability. The taxreforms which many Member States haveimplemented or are planning to introduce are,
therefore, welcome. By lowering tax rates
significantly, such reforms reduce distortions inthe economy and have the potential to lead to

positive long-term labour market and supply-side effects. Such effects could help to prevent
supply shortages and contain inflationary
pressures through the enhanced flexibility ofeconomies. However, cutting taxes without
supplementary reforms on the expenditure side
leads to an unwarranted deterioration in theunderlying fiscal position. Additional structuralexpenditure reform is therefore required,
including a reorientation of expenditure towardsinvestment in physical and human capital.Such reforms would also enhance positive
employment and supply-side effects, especially ifthey form part of a comprehensive reform
strategy which includes regulatory changes.
The structural reform of benefit systems isparticularly important in the area of pensions

(see Box 6).Progress in consolidation and comprehensivestructural fiscal reform should, therefore,feature prominently in Member States™updates of their stability programmes. The
latter were submitted to the EU Council andthe European Commission by the end of 2000and in early 2001, covering the period up to
2003/2005. They indicate that progress
towards safe budgetary positions is plannedin countries where this is not yet the case,

although the pace of consolidation hasimproved little in general compared with the
previous updates of the stability programmes,
despite upward revisions of projectedeconomic growth in most cases. Thecountries which still recorded budget deficits
in 2000 are planning to achieve balancedbudgets or surpluses in 2001 (Spain andGreece), 2002 (Austria), 2003 (Italy) or 2004
(Germany, France and Portugal). As a resultof the planned budgetary improvements androbust economic growth, government debt
ratios will continue their declining trend.From 2002 onwards only Greece, Italy andBelgium will still have debt ratios above the
60% threshold.Box 6Population ageing and the need for pension reform in the euro area
Population ageing will put growing pressure on public financesVirtually all euro area countries currently provide the largest share of their old-age pension benefits throughcompulsory, pay-as-you-go systems, where pensions are predominantly financed by current contributions
from workers. The importance of funded public or private pension plans is, by contrast, mainly small, eventhough some euro area countries are increasing their reliance on such plans. Existing systems have resulted inlarge increases in public pension expenditure over recent decades, as governments have extended eligibility to
receive pensions, the generosity of benefits and the pursuit of redistributive goals.Pension expenditure is expected to increase further over the next few decades as populations age. Eurostatdemographic projections anticipate that, since birth rates remain low and life expectancy is rising, all euro areacountries will experience significant population ageing over the next few decades. The ratio of elderly peopleto those of working age (also referred to as the elderly dependency ratio) is projected to double by the year
2050, rising from just under 27% to more than 53%.49Several attempts have been made recently to assess the soundness of current pension systems and quantify thefiscal costs associated with ageing populations. Long-term projections of future pension expenditure/contributions, which are based on a common set of macroeconomic assumptions for the different countries
and demographic trends, find that pension expenditure in relation to GDP will increase substantially in mostcountries if current policies are maintained. Although these underlying assumptions are subject to margins ofuncertainty, the size of such an increase in pension expenditure is likely to pose a serious challenge to the
sustainability of public finances and the debt burden in the decades to come.Major pension reforms are needed
Awareness of the fiscal risks associated with current demographic developments is clearly on the rise and alively debate on reform options is under way. Proposals for ﬁparametricﬂ reform focus on changes to benefits
and contributions within the framework of existing public pay-as-you-go pension schemes. ﬁSystemicﬂreforms towards funded systems basing future benefits on accumulated assets have also been proposed.Owing to the political difficulties and technical complexity of pension arrangements, policy initiatives have sofar favoured parametric reforms. However, while the measures taken have, until now, been largely sufficient
to contain any major budgetary imbalances, they appear inadequate to finance the projected increase in public
spending on pensions in the long run. Further reforms of this type could be aimed at adjusting the indexationof pensions, the replacement ratio or the retirement age. The last of these three would have the advantage ofsmoothing out the pension expenditure trend without jeopardising the living standard of the elderly.A gradual supplementation of traditional pay-as-you-go systems by funded schemes could contribute to thesustainability of public finances. They would also promote financial market developments and would probably
allow good returns through the choice of the most efficient investment strategy. Furthermore, an actuariallyfair connection between contributions and benefits could reduce labour market distortions. Governmentsshould support this development by providing the legal and fiscal frameworks required to reform existing
pension schemes. Some countries have already successfully embarked on this policy path.In summary, important policy adjustments are required to contain public expenditure and to avoid taxincreases or a significant deterioration in governments™ budgetary positions owing to population ageing.
Postponement of pension reform would, over time, only further increase the extent of the required adjustments.Moreover, population ageing coupled with a continuation of the prevailing low labour force participation rate
and early effective retirement age could result in a deterioration of economic performance, lower livingstandards and even higher fiscal burdens for future generations. Labour market policies which reducestructural unemployment and increase labour force participation are, therefore, important complements to
pension reform. Finally, it is important that countries eliminate remaining fiscal imbalances and reduce publicdebt before the costs of ageing populations rise further.6The global macroeconomic environment, exchange rates and
the balance of paymentsRecord year for global economic growth2000 was one of the most favourable of the
past 25 years for the world economy,
with its combination of strong output growthand comparatively low inflation, 
while worldtrade expanded at a robust pace. While allregions of the world made a positivecontribution to this performance, economicgrowth was particularly strong in NorthAmerica and in some East Asian economies Œ
in particular China. After a very strong firsthalf, however, economic activity in theUnited States slowed down substantially in50the second half of 2000. During the same
period, a slowdown in activity was also feltin other regions of the world, especially in Latin
America and East Asia. Some uncertainty alsoarose in individual emerging market economies,as reflected in the isolated episodes of financial
distress in Argentina and Turkey.The strong performance of the globaleconomy in the course of 2000 was increasinglyaffected by the continued increase in oilprices. Crude oil prices rose from USD 26.6
in the first quarter of 2000 to USD 32.5 inNovember 2000, only showing clear signs ofeasing during the last month of the year,
when prices temporarily dropped to USD 23.0.The earlier price hikes resulted from acombination of several factors, including
robust world demand, tight inventories ofcrude and refining products, and heightenedtension in the Middle East. In contrast to this
strong rise in oil prices, non-oil commodityprices exhibited a modest increase of 1.7% inUS dollar terms, particularly as a result of a

slow downward adjustment in the supply ofagricultural products in response to the lower
prices witnessed in 1999.In the United States, the year 2000 markedthe high point of nine years of economic
expansion, with real GDP growing at 5% and
unemployment remaining very low, at anaverage annual rate of 4%. At the same time,

productivity in the non-farm business sector
grew by 4.1%, up from 2.9% in 1999, and
therefore contributed to sustaining the strong
economic expansion. Annual CPI inflationrose quite significantly in 2000 to 3.4%, from
2.2% in 1999, as a result of oil prices

remaining high for a more protracted periodthan previously expected, while unit labourcosts increased by only 0.7%, down from 1.8%

in 1999. The main driving force behind therobust economic expansion in 2000 wasprivate domestic demand. Private consumption
grew by 5.3%, the same rate of growthexperienced in 1999, while private businessinvestment growth accelerated further to
10.2%, as compared with 6.6% in 1999. Thenegative contribution of net exports to realGDP growth was 0.9 percentage point, almost
the same as in 1999 (1 percentage point).
The robust growth of real GDP in 2000 wasmainly concentrated in the first half of the
year, while increasing signs of internal and
external imbalances in the US economy wereaccumulating. Indeed, the very low savings
rate Œ -0.1% in 2000, down from 2.2% in1999 Œ and the increase in the currentaccount deficit to 4.4% of GDP in 2000, up
from 3.6% in 1999, cast doubts on the
sustainability of the pace of economicexpansion. Against this background, the US
economy started to slow down considerablyin the third quarter of 2000 amid a continuingdecline in consumer and producer confidence.
In fact, the deceleration of the economyinvolved both private consumption andprivate investment, with real consumption

expenditure in the last quarter of 2000
growing by only 0.7% (quarter-on-quarter),down from 1.9% (quarter-on-quarter) in
the first quarter of 2000. Furthermore,by the end of the year, signs of strain inthe US financial markets started to appear
(as described in Section 2.2). Against thebackground of reduced corporate profitabilityand weaker economic prospects, stock

market prices declined significantly, in
particular in the high technology sector, and
corporate bond spreads widened, especially
in the ﬁjunk bondﬂ segment.During the first half of 2000 the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) of the
Federal Reserve System responded to risinginflationary pressures and continued the
monetary policy tightening initiated in June1999 by raising the target for the federalfunds rate to 6.5%, i.e. to 1 percentage point

higher than it was at the end of 1999.Although the FOMC continued to see therisks as being mainly on the inflation side
during most of the second half of 2000, it leftits target rate unchanged as uncertaintiesabout the development of domestic demand
increased. On the occasion of its last meeting
in 2000, which was held on 19 December,
the FOMC changed its assessment of the

balance of risks, as it believed that the riskswere weighted mainly towards conditionswhich may generate economic weakness.51Following this shift in the risk assessment,the FOMC lowered its target for the federalfunds rate by a total of 100 basis points to
5.5% in January 2001.
In Japan economic conditions improved onlyslightly in 2000 and uncertainties about thesustainability and robustness of the recoveryincreased again towards the end of the year.
In the wake of the recession in the secondhalf of 1999, economic activity picked up againat the beginning of 2000. However, in the
third quarter growth turned negative, to befollowed once more by positive growth inthe fourth quarter. Government spending lent

strong support to the economy during thefirst half of 2000, followed by a substantialdecrease in the second half, as the effects

of the 1999 supplementary fiscal packagebegan to fade. At that time, business fixedinvestment recovered, fuelled by favourable
profit conditions, adding to evidence that aself-sustained recovery driven mainly byprivate demand could finally be emerging.

However, the favourable results in thecorporate sector, which remained largelylimited to larger manufacturing firms, failed

to spill over to the household sector, andprivate consumption remained sluggishdespite some improvements in the income
and labour market situations. On the price
side, deflationary pressures persisted, as theConsumer Price Index (CPI) declined by 0.7%
on average during 2000, although they couldbe partly attributed to ongoing structural
changes in the Japanese economy. The Bank
of Japan abandoned its 18-month-long zero
interest rate policy in August 2000 and
raised its target for the uncollateralised
overnight call rate to 0.25%, as it believed
that the economy had reached a stage atwhich deflationary concerns had been
dispelled. In the light of the remaining
uncertainties regarding the Japanese recovery,the Government approved a moderate
supplementary fiscal package worthapproximately JPY 4.8 trillion in real spendingtowards the end of 2000. That was followed
by a moderate easing of the monetary policystance by the Bank of Japan in February 2001.Other economies in Asia performed stronglyin 2000, primarily reflecting robust export-led growth driven by strong demand in export
markets. This strong performance was setagainst a backdrop both of declining equitymarkets, with the exception of China, which
were heavily influenced by the decline in UShigh technology stocks, and of increasing
pressure on trade balances given the region™s
dependency on oil imports. Over the lastquarter of 2000 increasing concerns arosewith regard to growth prospects in the region
in view of, in particular, uncertain global
developments in 2001 which, in turn, tendedto widen the sovereign bond yield spreads
over the last quarter of 2000. Chinacontinued to post robust growth in 2000driven by strong capital flows in anticipation
of further trade and investment liberalisation
in connection with accession to the World
Trade Organisation (WTO) in 2001.In 2000 transition countries werecharacterised by a strong rebound in
economic activity and by a generally morefavourable economic climate. Higher growthwas a common feature throughout the region,
with Russia™s performance in 2000 beingparticularly noteworthy, as growth isestimated to have been above 7% and the
current account and fiscal balances improvedsubstantially. While this development can
mostly be ascribed to high energy prices Œ
with Russia being a net exporter of energy Œand a competitive exchange rate, economicgrowth was more broadly based than in 1999,
with a significant recovery in both consumerand investment demand. At the same time,Russian bond spreads narrowed markedly in
2000, remaining, however, wide comparedwith those of other emerging markets.With regard to central and easternEuropean accession countries, their economicperformance was very positive in 2000,
sustained by the favourable out-turn in theeuro area. Robust economic growth was,
however, accompanied by somewhat higher
inflation rates and by relatively high currentaccount deficits, which in some instances
prompted tighter monetary policies. Overall,52Chart 16Main developments in major industrialised economiesSources: National data, BIS, Eurostat and ECB calculations.1)Eurostat data are used for the euro area; for the United States and Japan national data are used.

2)Data for the euro area up to 1995 are estimates for the HICP based on national CPI data; after 1995 HICP data are used.

3)Euro area data are ECB calculations and are averages of national three-month interbank rates, from 1999 onwards three-month
EURIBOR are used.4)Up to 1999 the USD/EUR line shows USD/ECU data.
1994199519961997199819992000
-4-3-2-101234
5678-4-3-2-101234
5678euro areaUnited StatesJapaneuro areaUnited StatesJapaneuro areaUnited StatesJapanOutput growth 1)(annual percentage changes; quarterly data)1994199519961997199819992000
-2-101
2345-2-101
2345Inflation rates 2)(annual percentage changes; monthly data)1994199519961997199819992000
012345678012345678Short-term interest rates 3)(monthly averages; in percentages)1994199519961997199819992000
0.80.91.01.11.21.31.41.51.61.77585
95
105
115
125135145USD/EUR (left-hand scale)JPY/USD (right-hand scale)Exchange rates 4)(monthly averages)53the financial situation was less favourablecompared with the previous year as stockmarkets in the region were characterised by

severe downward corrections concentratedin the second half of the year.As regards developments in other countries,the Turkish stock market experienced severelosses from mid-2000 onwards, after its

overall index nearly tripled in 1999. These
losses intensified at the end of November2000, in the wake of a severe liquidity crisis
in the Turkish banking sector, requiring theannouncement of an increased commitmentby the IMF to restore confidence and stabilise
markets. After a short period of relativestability, however, financial problems re-
emerged in February 2001, ultimately leading
to the abandonment of the pre-announcedcrawling peg regime. The crisis showed signsof easing after the Turkish lira was floated
and a set of policy measures were announced,which were designed to achieve the Turkish
Government™s goals of reducing inflation and

ensuring sustainable growth.Latin America achieved a strong rebound in2000 from the recession experienced the
year before, with real output growth reaching4.2%. By contrast with the positive result in
the real sector, financial markets exhibited aweak performance, characterised by wideningsovereign bond yield spreads, declining stock
prices and the interruption of the downwardtrend in interest rates. The Mexican economy
expanded at the fastest pace in almost 20
years, with real GDP expected to grow atabout 7% in 2000 and the unemployment
rate dropping to a level of only 2%, supported
by strong exports to the United States, high
oil prices and buoyant private consumption.Brazil™s recovery was driven by exports,
although lower interest rates and increasedcredit availability allowed investment and
consumer spending to broaden the base of
the expansion. In Argentina, lower thanexpected economic growth in 2000 was theresult of weak domestic confidence and

concerns over fiscal imbalances, as well asincreasing current account deficits resulting
from the appreciation of the peso against thecurrencies of major trading partners and an
increasing debt servicing burden. In the lastquarter of the year, such fragile economic
conditions, coupled with increasing politicaltensions, led to the eruption of severefinancial turbulence, which nonetheless eased
after the announcement of an IMF-led
financial support programme. By the end ofthe year the outlook for the region as a
whole was showing signs of improvement,
although domestic political uncertainty,doubts about the extent of the slowdown in
the United States and, in some countries, thefall in oil prices were giving cause for concern.Euro rebounded towards the end 2000The euro continued to decline against the
currencies of the major trading partners ofthe euro area during most of 2000, before

rebounding strongly towards the end of
the year. The declining trend of the eurowas temporarily interrupted in May and
June 2000 when the single currency
strengthened, but downward pressuresubsequently resumed and persisted until theChart 17Nominal effective exchange rate 1)
(monthly averages; index: 1999 Q1 = 100)Source: ECB.1)Data are ECB calculations (see the article in the April 2000
issue of the Monthly Bulletin). An upward movement of the
index represents an appreciation of the euro. The horizontal

line shows the average over the period shown (January

1994 to February 2001).1994199519961997199819992000
80828486889092949698100102104
10610811080828486889092949698100102104
10610811054autumn. On 22 September 2000 the centralbanks of the G7 expressed their shared
concern about the potential implications of
the decline of the euro for the worldeconomy and intervened jointly in the foreign
exchange markets. Amid concerns about the
global and domestic repercussions of the
exchange rate of the euro, unilateralintervention by the ECB and the national
central banks (NCBs) on behalf of the ECB insupport of the euro took place again in earlyNovember 2000. Towards the end of the
year, the euro staged a sharp recovery amid
firming signs of an economic slowdown in theeuro area™s major trading partners and
sustained growth prospects for the euro area.At the end of 2000 the nominal effectiveexchange rate index was, on balance, only

around 2% lower than at the beginning of the
year, although around 8% below its averagelevel in 1999. On 13 March 2001, the cut-off

date for data for this Annual Report, theeuro, as measured by the nominal effectiveexchange rate, had appreciated by almost 4%
with regard to the average for 2000. Trends
in the euro™s real effective exchange rates,which are adjusted for price and labour cost
development differentials between the euroarea and its major trading partners, trackedthe nominal index fairly closely.
Against the US dollar, the euro depreciatedthroughout most of 2000, reaching a trough
of USD 0.8252 on 26 October 2000, whichimplied a depreciation of around 18%
compared with the beginning of the year.
The strength of the US dollar was partlyattributed to markets focusing on thedifferences in relative economic performance
and prospects between the United Statesand the euro area. However, as economicdevelopments and prospects for the euro
area improved in the course of the year,
the decline in the external value of theeuro became increasingly inconsistent with
medium-term economic fundamentals,eventually leading to concerns that promptedintervention in foreign exchange markets.
Amid growing evidence of a slowdown in theUS economy, the euro rebounded in late
2000. At the end of 2000 the euro wasquoted at USD 0.93, which was almost 8%weaker than at the beginning of the year. Inearly 2001 the euro fluctuated in a range
of between USD 0.90 and USD 0.95 and on13 March it traded at USD 0.9202, which wasroughly the same level as the average for

2000.Compared with the beginning of the year,the euro depreciated by roughly 13% againstthe Japanese yen until its trough on26 October 2000. This development was
fuelled by indications that the Japaneseeconomy was entering a phase of moresustainable growth. Towards the end of the
year, however, revisions in the outlook forthe Japanese economy triggered a revision of
the markets™ exchange rate assessment.
Thereafter, the euro appreciated by 20% in
the period up to the end of 2000, whenit was quoted at JPY 106.92, implying an
appreciation of 4% compared with 3 January2000. Vis-à-vis the US dollar, the yen alsoweakened by almost 13% in the course of the

year. On 13 March 2001 the euro was quotedat JPY 110.27, i.e. about 11% higher than theaverage for 2000.Current account deficit increasedThe current account of the euro area reported
a deficit of 28.3 billion in 2000, comparedwith a deficit of 5.8 billion in 1999. The mainreason for this development was a reduction in
the goods surplus from 83.4 billion in 1999 to59.8 billion in 2000, as the increase in theimports of goods exceeded the rise in the
exports of goods. The growth in the imports of
goods partly reflected the strong increase inimport prices which, in turn, was attributable to
the combined effects of the strong rise in oil
prices and the depreciation of the euro. Strongdomestic demand in the euro area alsocontributed to increasingly higher import
volumes as the year progressed. Exports
of goods grew primarily as a result of
increasing export volumes related to strong
foreign demand and the improving pricecompetitiveness of the euro area.
55Significant movements in the othercomponents of the current account partiallyoffset one another as the income deficit fell
from 32.4 billion to 24.7 billion, whereas
the deficit for current transfers increasedfrom 45.0 billion in 1999 to 49.9 billion in
2000, and the services deficit increasedslightly from 11.8 billion to 13.5 billion.Combined direct and portfolio investmentnet outflows declined slightlyCombined direct and portfolio investmentnet outflows amounted to 143.4 billion in2000, which was somewhat lower than in1999 (162.3 billion). This primarily reflected
lower net outflows of direct investment and

higher net inflows of debt instruments whichmore than offset the significant increase innet outflows of equities.Taking a more detailed view of individualitems, debt instruments recorded net inflows
of 145.6 billion, significantly higher than in1999 (7.7 billion), which were mainly relatedto substantial foreign investment in euro area
bonds and notes. The narrowing in thepositive interest rate differential of the United
States vis-à-vis the euro area during 2000
may have been one of the factors motivating
foreign investment in euro area bonds andnotes.The decline in net direct investment outflowswas mainly related to strong growth of direct
investment by non-residents in the euro area,
which more than offset higher directinvestment abroad by euro area residents.Direct investment in the euro area increased
to 303.1 billion in 2000, from 
166.2 billionin 1999. This increase was due to both higherinflows of equity capital (including reinvested
earnings), notably related to a very largetransaction, and particularly strong growthof inflows of the ﬁother capitalﬂ item, which
mostly consists of inter-company loans.Portfolio investment equity net outflowsrose substantially in 2000, to 266.0 billion(from 49.4 billion in 1999). In 2000, bothdirect investment and portfolio investment
equity accounts were strongly affected bythe acquisition of companies through the
exchange of shares. In most cases, in
accordance with international standards, the
investment in the respective firm wasrecorded as direct investment and the
settlement of the transaction in shares asportfolio equity investment. In particular, inearly 2000, a single transaction resulted in a
very high inflow of direct investment and anoutflow of portfolio investment/equity of asimilar size.Hospital InfantilVirgen del Roc™o,NiŒos Ud.
Oncolog™a Pedi⁄trica,Seville,Spain
Designed by children at the hospital.Untitled
Chapter IICentral bank operations581Monetary policy implementation
1.1Overview
The operational framework for theimplementation of the single monetary
policy worked efficiently in 2000, confirmingthe positive overall experience of 1999.Therefore, no significant changes were made
within the framework in the course of theyear, with the exception of a switch from a
fixed rate tender procedure to a variable rate
tender procedure for the main refinancingoperations (MROs) and the publication of theestimated aggregate liquidity needs of the
banking system.The ECB published a revised version of thedocument entitled ﬁThe single monetary
policy in Stage Three: General documentationon Eurosystem monetary policy instruments
and proceduresﬂ (General Documentation)on 5 December 2000. This document contains
a detailed description of the monetary policy

instruments and procedures applied bythe Eurosystem. The revised version includes
the changes to the operational framework
endorsed by the Governing Council of theECB between the publication of the previousversions of the General Documentation on
18 September 1998 and 31 August 2000. The
overall design of the operational framework,comprising the three main elements, namely
open market operations, standing facilitiesand minimum reserves, remains unchanged.
Among the open market operations, theMROs are the most important, playing apivotal role in steering liquidity conditions
and signalling the stance of monetary policy.They provide the bulk of liquidity to thefinancial sector. They are liquidity-providing
reverse transactions, conducted as standard
tenders at weekly intervals and with a maturityof two weeks. Moreover, the Eurosystem
executes longer-term refinancing operations(LTROs) with a maturity of three months.These operations are aimed at providing
longer-term refinancing to the financialsector, on a monthly basis, without theintention of sending signals to the market orguiding market interest rates. In addition,the Eurosystem may conduct other types of
open market operations in order to smooththe effects on interest rates caused by
unexpected liquidity fluctuations in themarket (known as fine-tuning operations) orwith a view to adjusting the structural 
positionof the Eurosystem vis-à-vis the financial sector(known as structural operations). In 2000 theEurosystem 
conducted fine-tuning operationson two occasions, while no structuraloperations were executed.The standing facilities are aimed at providingand absorbing overnight liquidity, signallingthe general stance of monetary policy and
setting an upper and a lower limit forovernight market interest rates.Besides the standing facilities, the Eurosystemrequires credit institutions to hold minimumreserves consisting of cash balances with the

Eurosystem equal to 2% of their short-termliabilities. The purpose of this requirement isthe stabilisation of money market interest
rates and the enlargement of the liquiditydeficit of the banking system vis-à-vis theEurosystem. The stabilisation of money
market rates is facilitated by the fact that thereserve requirement must only be fulfilled onaverage in a one-month maintenance period.

This has a significant smoothing effect on thedemand for reserves by credit institutionsand thereby also on the behaviour of money

market interest rates. This also enables theEurosystem, under normal circumstances, to
limit its open market operations to MROs
and LTROs. As the required reserves areremunerated at the average rate, over themaintenance period, of the Eurosystem™s
MROs, they do not entail any significant costfor the banking industry.In its management of the liquidity conditions
in the euro area through open marketoperations, the ECB focuses on the interbank
market for reserves. In this context, reserves
are understood as being the current accountdeposits that credit institutions in the euro59area hold with the Eurosystem in order tofulfil the minimum reserve requirements. Thesupply of such reserves is determined by the
net effect of the liquidity provided throughmonetary policy operations and the liquiditywithdrawn by so-called ﬁautonomous
factorsﬂ. The latter refer to the central bank™sbalance sheet items which do not dependon monetary policy operations, such as
banknotes in circulation, governmentdeposits, items in the course of settlementand net foreign assets. The level of theautonomous factors averaged 103.1 billionin 2000, ranging from 78.2 billion to158.6 billion (see Chart 18). The averagelevel of the autonomous factors in 2000
was 19.8 billion higher than in 1999. Theday-to-day movements of the autonomousfactors are often considerable; changes in the
order of 10 billion are relatively frequent.Chart 18Liquidity factors and the use of standing facilities in the euro area in 2000708090100110120130140150160EUR billions708090100110120130140150160EUR billionscurrent accountsautonomous factorsreserve requirementsStanding facilities-20-10010Jan.Feb.Mar.Apr.MayJuneJulyAug.Sep.Oct.Nov.Dec.
-20-10010marginal lending facilitydeposit facility60Government deposits with some of the NCBs
represent the most volatile of these factors.The volatility of the government deposits

(measured by the standard deviation ofthe daily changes) amounted to morethan 4.9 billion, compared with around1.0 billion for banknotes.In 2000 the average level of reserverequirements of credit institutions in the euro
area amounted to 
111.8 billion, which was10.2 billion or 10% higher than in 1999.The rise in the level of reserve requirements,together with the increase in the autonomous
factors, caused the overall liquidity deficit of
the banking sector vis-à-vis the Eurosystemto increase by 29.8 billion or 16% comparedwith 1999. In 2000 the average daily amount
of liquidity provided through the open marketoperations amounted to 213.1 billion, whilethe use of the standing facilities resulted
in a daily net withdrawal of liquidity of
0.2 billion.1.2The main refinancing operations
In 2000 the Eurosystem conducted a total of
51 MROs. The allotment volumes variedbetween 35 billion and 
128 billion, withthe average amounting to 80 billion. Of allthe liquidity provided through regular openmarket operations, 74% was supplied by the
MROs. In 1999 and during the first half of
2000 all MROs were conducted as fixed ratetenders. However, in response to the severeoverbidding which had developed in the
context of the fixed rate tender procedure,
the Governing Council decided, on 8 June
2000, to switch to a variable rate tender

procedure (American auction procedure) asfrom the operation to be conducted on27 June 2000. At the same time, the

Governing Council decided to establish a
minimum bid rate for the purpose of signallingthe monetary policy stance, which had been
indicated in the previous procedure by therate applied to the fixed rate tenders. Theminimum bid rate was initially set at the

same level as the rate applied to the
previous fixed rate tender operation. WhenChart 19Total bid amount and allotment ratio in 20009,0008,0007,0006,0005,0004,0003,0002,0001,0000100908070605040302010012Jan.Feb.Mar.Apr.May
28923822519417
June1528
July1226
Aug.923
Sep.620
Oct.418
Dec.1322
Nov.115
29bid amount (left-hand scale)allotment ratio (right-hand scale)EUR billions%61announcing the switch to the variable ratetender, it was highlighted that the change oftender procedure was not intended as a
change in the monetary policy stance. It wasalso emphasised that the Governing Councilwould retain the option of reverting to fixed
rate tenders, if and when this was deemedappropriate.The price mechanism of the variable rate
tender procedure encourages theEurosystem™s counterparties to bid in line
with their liquidity needs. The switch froma fixed rate tender procedure to a variablerate tender procedure therefore had a
significant impact on the bidding behaviourin the MROs (see Chart 19). The average
amount of bids submitted in the MROs
conducted as fixed rate tenders in the firsthalf of 2000 was 3,614 billion, indicating asubstantial increase compared with 1999,
when it had been 954 billion. As aconsequence, the average allotment ratio fellfrom around 11% in 1999 to 2.7% in the first
half of 2000. The largest bid, 8,491 billion,was recorded in the operation on 6 June2000. In the last two MROs executed prior

to the announcement of the switch to thevariable rate tender, the allotment ratio was
below 1%. The strong rise in bids in the first
half of 2000 was exacerbated by the fact that,during most of that period, there were
market expectations of interest rate hikes by
the ECB, and short-term money market rateswere often significantly above the main
refinancing rate. This made it attractive for
banks to bid for large amounts of liquidityfrom the central bank.Following the switch to a variable rate tenderprocedure, the amount of bids fell sharply.
The average aggregate bid amount in the

operations conducted from 27 June 2000 tothe end of the year was 
161 billion, whilethe average allotment ratio was 58%. The
switch to the variable tender procedurecaused the number of counterpartiesparticipating in the MROs to fall from an
average of 814 in the first half of 2000 to
640 in the second half. In the variable ratetenders, the average spread between theminimum bid rate established by theGoverning Council and the marginal bid ratewas 8 basis points. The largest observed
spread between the marginal and theminimum bid rates was 43 basis points on30 August 2000, reflecting the strong rate
hike expectations prevailing at the time. Thespread between the marginal rate and theaverage weighted rate amounted to 2 basis

points on average, with a maximum of 6 anda minimum of 0 basis points. The small size ofthis spread indicates that the expectations of
counterparties regarding the marginal rate ofthe operations were relatively homogeneousand that the volumes of bids submitted at

considerably higher rates were small.The switch to the new tender procedure was
accompanied by a decision to start publishingan estimate of the aggregate liquidity needsof the banking system in order to facilitate
the task of counterparties in preparing theirbids. The liquidity needs of the banking systemrelate to two groups of items. The first is the
reserve requirements and the second is thenet result of all other factors affecting the
consolidated balance sheet of the Eurosystem,
i.e. the autonomous factors. Of these two
components, the reserve requirements aregenerally known with a high degree of
accuracy a few days after the start of themaintenance period, while the estimate ofthe autonomous factors is less certain. In
2000 the average absolute forecast error(i.e. the average absolute difference betweenthe estimated value of the autonomous
factors published once a week for the ninesubsequent days and the corresponding
outcome) was 1.11 billion. The standarddeviation of the difference between theestimated and the actual values was
1.34 billion.1.3The longer-term refinancing
operationsIn addition to the MROs, the Eurosystemalso conducts LTROs, which are liquidity-
providing reverse transactions with amonthly frequency and with a maturity of62three months. On average over the year,LTROs provided about 26% of the totalrefinancing through regular open market
operations. LTROs are not, as a rule,conducted with the intention of steering theliquidity situation, of sending signals to the
market or of guiding market interest rates. Inorder for the Eurosystem to act as a rate-taker, LTROs have been conducted in the
form of variable rate tenders with pre-
announced allotment volumes. The Americanauction procedure was applied. While the
first six LTROs in 2000 had a volume of20 billion, the last six amounted to15 billion. On average over the year, avolume of liquidity of 17.5 billion wasprovided through this type of operation. On
average, 270 counterparties participated in
the LTROs in 2000.1.4Other open market operations
In 2000 the Eurosystem carried out two fine-
tuning operations. The first of these aimed atabsorbing the ample liquidity prevailing at thestart of the year, which was due, on the one
hand, to the ECB™s commitment to prevent
liquidity constraints during the transitionto the new millennium and, on the other, to

the heavy recourse of the Eurosystem™scounterparties to the marginal lending facilityon 30 December 1999. The operation was
conducted as a liquidity-absorbing fine-tuningoperation with a one-week maturity on5 January 2000 and was carried out by means
of a collection of fixed-term deposits in a
variable rate, quick tender with a pre-announced maximum bid rate of 3%. While

the announcement was for an intendedallotment amount of 33 billion, thebids amounted to only 14.4 billion. Of the210 counterparties eligible for the Eurosystem™sfine-tuning operations, 43 participated in
the operation. The second fine-tuning
operation was related to unexpectedheavy recourse to the deposit facility of11.2 billion on 20 June 2000, which causedliquidity tightening towards the end ofthe maintenance period. The Eurosystemconducted the operation on the followingday, specified as a liquidity-providing variablerate transaction, in the form of a quick
tender with overnight maturity. The bidsamounted to 18.8 billion, while the amountallotted was 7.0 billion. 38 counterpartiesparticipated in the operation.
1.5Standing facilities
The width of the interest rate corridordetermined by the two standing facilitiesremained unchanged at 200 basis pointsthroughout the year. Both the marginal
lending rate and the deposit rate were setsymmetrically, implying a spread of 100 basispoints between each rate and the fixed tender
rate or the minimum bid rate of the MROs.The average use of both standing facilities
declined compared with the previous year,

indicating that the reserve management ofthe Eurosystem™s counterparties had becomemore effective and that, on average, the
liquidity management by the Eurosystem
achieved more balanced liquidity conditions
at the end of the maintenance periods.
Over the year, average daily recourse to themarginal lending and deposit facilities
amounted to 0.4 billion and 0.5 billionrespectively. Normally, recourse to standingfacilities is relatively low during most of the
maintenance period, as can be seen from
Chart 18 above. In particular, counterpartiesgenerally use the deposit facility only after
they have fulfilled their reserve requirements,
which Œ for most credit institutions Œ occursonly on the last few days of the maintenance
period. Accordingly, about 85% of the use of
the deposit facility in 2000 took place in the
last five days of the maintenance period. The
same applies, although to a lesser extent, to
the use of the marginal lending facility.
Sometimes the use of the standing facilitiescan be substantial owing either to exceptionalcircumstances, such as those described in
Section 1.4 above, or to technical problemsin settling payments.631.6The minimum reserve system
The average level of reserve requirements ofcredit institutions in the euro area amountedto 111.8 billion in 2000. The actual level ofthe aggregate reserve requirements varied
between 107.5 billion (during themaintenance period ending on 23 February2000) and 116.6 billion (during themaintenance period ending on 23 December2000). Of the 7,521 credit institutions subjectto minimum reserves, 5,304 fulfil their
requirement directly with the relevant NCBsof the Eurosystem, while others fulfil them
indirectly through an intermediary. The
reserve holdings of banks fluctuated between78.7 billion and 137.8 billion in thecourse of the year, indicating that a
substantial buffer against unexpected liquiditywithdrawals was available (see Chart 18).
Indeed, the EONIA showed limited volatility

in 2000. The standard deviation of its dailychanges was only 14 basis points, despite the
very low frequency of fine-tuning operations.
Consequently, the two main functions ofthe minimum reserve system, namely thestabilisation of money market interest rates
and the enlargement of the structural liquiditydeficit of the banking sector, were successfullyfulfilled.As a consequence of the smooth functioning
of the minimum reserve system, no changes
were made to its main features, i.e. to theaveraging provisions, to the duration of themaintenance period (one month, starting on
the 24th of each month and ending on the23rd of the following month) or to theremuneration of the required reserves
(remuneration at the average of the marginalinterest rates of the MROs relevant for thereserve maintenance period). Similarly, no
changes were made to the reserve ratio(which remained at 2% of the relevantliabilities), the reserve base or the amount
of the lump-sum allowance (100,000)deductible from the required reserves. Theonly new elements introduced into the
system in 2000 were the amendments toRegulation (EC) No. 2818/98 of the European
Central Bank on the application of minimumreserves (ECB/1998/15) and Regulation (EC)No. 2819/98 of the European Central Bankconcerning the consolidated balance sheet of
the monetary financial institutions sector
(ECB/1998/16)1. The purpose of theseamendments was to specify more clearly how
mergers and divisions of institutions affecttheir reserve requirements and to improveprocedures regarding the exchange of
information between credit institutions and
the NCBs on the reserve requirement figures.This latter amendment, in particular, has
made it possible for the Eurosystem to haveat its disposal definitive figures on reserve
requirements before the end of the
maintenance period, which has improvedthe precision of liquidity management.Furthermore, the new procedure eliminates
late revisions to reserve requirements. Thenew Regulations became effective inNovember 2000.Furthermore, in order to enhance
transparency as regards the sanctions policy
of the ECB in the field of minimum reserves,the ECB made public on 2 February 2000 thepenalty interest rate applied in the case of
breaches of the obligation to hold minimumreserves. Normally, the penalty rate is themarginal lending rate plus 2.5 percentage
points. In the event of repetitive breaches,i.e. in cases where an institution fails to fulfilits reserve requirements more than twice
during any 12-month period, the penalty rateis the marginal lending rate plus 5 percentage
points. The number of breaches of reserve
requirements continued to decline in 2000.The average number of infringements permaintenance period was 92, whereas in 1999
it was 139. Moreover, in most cases, thedeficiencies were small. Around 80% of thesanctions imposed were for amounts below
500.1See the ECB Regulation of 31 August 2000 (ECB/2000/8).
641.7The Eurosystem™s eligible collateral
and its use for credit operationsThe Statute of the ESCB demands that all theEurosystem™s credit operations be coveredby adequate collateral. The collateral
framework of the Eurosystem is designed to
protect the Eurosystem against incurring
losses in its monetary policy and payment
systems operations (see Section 5 below onrisk management), to ensure the equaltreatment of counterparties and to enhance
operational efficiency. Common eligibilitycriteria are applied to collateral acceptedfor credit operations conducted by the
Eurosystem. At the same time, due regard isshown to differences in central bank practicesand financial structures across the euro
area and to the need on the part of theEurosystem to ensure sufficient availability ofadequate collateral for its credit operations.
According to Article 102 (ex Article 104a)
of the Treaty, privileged access by publicinstitutions to financial institutions is prohibited;
accordingly, no discrimination should be madein the collateral framework on grounds ofthe public or private nature of the issuers.In order to take account of existing
differences in the financial structure of

Member States, assets eligible for creditoperations include a large number of differentinstruments. A distinction is made between

two categories of assets eligible for the creditoperations of the Eurosystem. These two
categories are referred to as ﬁtier oneﬂ assets
and ﬁtier twoﬂ assets respectively. Thisdistinction has no bearing on the qualityof the assets and their eligibility for the

various types of Eurosystem monetary policyoperations, with the exception that tier twoassets are not normally expected to be used

by the Eurosystem in the case of outrighttransactions. Tier one assets consist ofmarketable debt instruments fulfilling uniform
euro area eligibility criteria specified by theECB. Tier two assets consist of assets whichare of particular importance for nationalfinancial markets and banking systems and forwhich eligibility criteria are established bythe NCBs, subject to the minimum eligibility

criteria established by the ECB. Tier twoassets may be marketable or non-marketabledebt instruments or they may consist of
equities. A public list of tier one andmarketable tier two assets is updated weeklyand published by the ECB on its website

(www.ecb.int). As at end of December 2000,
the amount of total marketable eligibleassets potentially available for Eurosystem
operations was just over 6,300 billion (upfrom 6,150 billion in January 2000). Eligibleassets actually held by credit institutions
accounted for approximately one-third of this
total amount. The overwhelming proportionof this amount (93%) was composed of
tier one assets, while the remaining 7% wasmade up of tier two assets (over half of thisamount being equities valued at market
prices). 57% of the assets were governmentsecurities, 32% were securities issued bycredit institutions and the remaining 11%

were assets issued by non-financialcorporations. In terms of maturities, 85% ofthe assets were long-term bonds, while
medium-term notes, short-term securitiesand equities each represented approximately
5% of the total assets. Of the total amount
of marketable eligible assets, approximately10% were effectively put forward ordeposited by counterparties to secure the
Eurosystem™s monetary policy and intradaycredit operations throughout the year.Eurosystem counterparties may use eligibleassets on a cross-border basis, i.e. obtainfunds from the NCB of the Member State in
which they are established by making use ofassets located in another Member State (seealso Section 2.2). In the year under review,
predominantly domestic collateral was usedby counterparties; the cross-border use of
collateral remained stable at approximately
17%, with almost all of the collateral used
cross-border being accounted for by tier oneassets.651.8Participation of the Eurosystem™s
counterparties in monetary policyoperationsThe Eurosystem™s monetary policy frameworkallows a broad range of counterparties to
participate in monetary policy operations. All
credit institutions subject to minimumreserves may access the standing facilities
and participate in open market operationsbased on standard tenders. However,
counterparties must also fulfil any operational
criteria specified in the contractual orregulatory arrangements applied by the
Eurosystem so as to ensure the efficient

conduct of monetary policy operations. As aconsequence, about 3,600 of the around7,500 euro area credit institutions subject to

minimum reserves at the end of December2000 had access to the deposit facility, and3,000 to the marginal lending facility. About
2,500 credit institutions could participate inopen market operations based on standard
tenders. A limited group currently consisting
of around 200 institutions has been selectedas eligible for fine-tuning operations.Compared with the situation prevailing at the
end of 1999, the total number of creditinstitutions declined by around 400, 200 of
which had access to the standing facilities.This decrease was mainly due toconsolidation in the banking industry. No
relevant change occurred, however, in the
overall number of institutions with access toopen market transactions in 2000 compared
with the end of 1999.The effective participation of counterpartiesin the Eurosystem™s main refinancingoperations ranged from 655 to 923 bidders
during the time when the fixed rate tender
procedure was applied (i.e. in the first half of2000), while it ranged from 496 to 800 in thesecond half of 2000, when the variable rate
tender procedure was applied. Generally, theoverall number of bidders from one week tothe next was more volatile during the fixed
rate tender period than in the variable ratetender period. Participation in LTROs rangedfrom 165 to 354 counterparties during theyear. On average, the number of participantsdecreased in the second half of 2000,
compared with the first half. The number
of counterparties eligible for fine-tuningoperations decreased during 2000 from 211
to 198.I.9Money market activity
In 2000 the euro area money marketfunctioned smoothly and the successfulprocess of integration initiated in 1999 wasconfirmed, thereby contributing to an efficient
re-distribution, throughout the euro area, ofthe liquidity provided by the Eurosystemthrough its monetary policy operations.According to available information, overallmoney market activity in the euro area
increased compared with 1999. In theinterbank market for deposits, in which banksexchange short-term liquidity without the
guarantee of collateral, activity remainedsteady compared with 1999, while it grew
significantly in other segments of the money
market, including the repo market and,
particularly, the interest rate swap market,
where activity may have doubled compared
with 1999. Activity in the unsecured deposit
market seems to have concentrated further
on very short-term maturities, notably in

overnight transactions, while repo market
activity increasingly appears to haveconcentrated on slightly longer maturities (of
up to one month). Most of the increase inactivity in the very liquid interest rate swapmarket is attributed to the success of EONIA-
indexed transactions.As regards developments in the short-term
securities markets (Treasury bills, commercialpaper and certificates of deposit), someprogress was made regarding integration,
although it remained limited compared withthat prevailing in other segments of themoney market. Cross-border activity within
the euro area increased somewhat.662Payment and settlement systems operations
Table 6Payment traffic in TARGET*)Volume19992000Change, %
OverallTotal42,257,78447,980,02313.5
Daily average163,157188,15715.3
DomesticTotal34,804,45837,811,1128.6

Daily average134,380148,27910.3
Cross-borderTotal7,453,32610,168,91136.4

Daily average28,77739,87838.6
Value,EUR billions19992000Change, %
OverallTotal239,472263,2919.9

Daily average9251,03311.7
DomesticTotal146,236153,2534.8

Daily average5656016.4
Cross-borderTotal93,236110,03818.0
Daily average36043220.0
*)In 1999: 259 operating days; in 2000: 255 operating days.
interbank transactions, with the remainderbeing customer payments. The averagevalue of a cross-border interbank payment
was 10.8 million and the average valueof a cross-border customer payment was1.1 million. Information on peak traffic days
in terms of volume and value is provided in

Table 7.Further statistics can be found on the ECB™swebsite at www.ecb.int under the TARGET
heading in the ﬁPayment statisticsﬂ section.2.1The TARGET system
The Trans-European Automated Real-timeGross settlement Express Transfer

(TARGET) system operated successfullythroughout 2000 and is now recognised bymarket participants as the core euro payment
system. It provides an efficient service fortime-critical large-value payments, especiallythose related to money market and foreign

exchange market operations.TARGET upgradeOn 20 November 2000 the TARGET 2000
upgrade Œ the first common TARGETsoftware release since the systemcommenced live operations in January 1999 Œ
went live. The upgraded software included
the new message format for customerpayments MT103 (and its straight-through

processing version, the MT103+). This new
standard facilitates the implementation bybanks of the transparency requirements set
out in Directive No. 97/5/EC of the EuropeanParliament and the Council of 27 January 1997on cross-border credit transfers. All TARGET
components were modified before or during
the weekend of 18 and 19 November 2000,the same weekend as the SWIFT network
was updated.TARGET operations in 2000
In 2000 the daily average of paymentsprocessed by the system as a whole
(i.e. both cross-border and domestic payments)was 188,157, representing a value of
1,033 billion (see Table 6).TARGET cross-border traffic in 2000
amounted to 41.8% of the total TARGETvalue, compared with 38.9% in 1999, and
to 21.2% of the total TARGET volume,

compared with 17.6% in 1999. Of the cross-border TARGET payments, 96.5% in terms of
value and 65.5% in terms of volume wereTable 7Peak traffic in TARGET in 2000VolumeOverall283,74529 Dec.
Domestic236,65829 Dec.
Cross-border60,77029 Sep.
Value (EUR billions)Overall1,55130 Nov.
Domestic1,03230 Nov.
Cross-border58630 June
67TARGET availability in 2000After a large number of tests were carriedout in 1999, the transition to the year 2000passed without any significant problems forTARGET.TARGET availability clearly improved in 2000,showing that the teething problems
encountered in 1999 had been successfullyovercome. The number of incidents in TARGETduring 2000 decreased substantially, by 70%.TARGET calendarIn 2000, in addition to Saturdays and Sundays,
TARGET was closed on New Year™s Day,
Good Friday (Catholic/Protestant), EasterMonday (Catholic/Protestant), 1 May (LabourDay), Christmas Day and 26 December 2000.

In some countries in which these days werenormal business days, the NCBs kept theirreal-time gross settlement (RTGS) systems
open for limited domestic operations. For2001, the Governing Council has decided tohave an exceptional additional closing day on
31 December in order to safeguard thesmooth conversion of retail payment systemsand internal bank systems to the euro.In December 2000 a long-term calendar forTARGET operating days was established
which will be applicable as from 2002 untilfurther notice. Accordingly, TARGET will be
closed, in addition to Saturdays and Sundays,

on New Year™s Day, Good Friday (Catholic/Protestant), Easter Monday (Catholic/Protestant), 1 May (Labour Day), Christmas
Day and 26 December. On these closingdays, TARGET as a whole, including all thenational RTGS systems, will be closed
completely. Some operational and legaladaptation might be necessary in someMember States. Therefore, the competent
authorities of those Member States have been
invited to take action, where necessary, toremove any legal impediment to implementing
the long-term calendar for TARGET operating
days. A long-term calendar was deemed
necessary to eliminate uncertainties forfinancial markets and, as indicated by thebanking sector, to avoid problems arising
from different national TARGET operating
days. On TARGET closing days no standingfacilities will be available at the NCBs. Thesedays will not be settlement days for the
euro money market or for foreign exchangetransactions involving the euro. The EONIAand the foreign exchange reference rate
will not be published either. Furthermore,the correspondent central banking model
(CCBM) for the cross-border use of collateral
will be closed on TARGET closing days.TARGET reimbursement schemeOn 1 January 2001 a TARGET reimbursement
scheme was introduced for the benefitof TARGET participants in the event of
TARGET malfunctioning. The scheme will
apply whenever the same-day processing ofpayment orders within TARGET cannot becompleted. The reimbursement scheme is
intended to compensate participants forcertain higher costs they incur when havingrecourse to the standing facilities of the
Eurosystem in the event of a malfunctioning.In order to ensure a level playing-field, thescheme also applies to participants in euro
RTGS systems of non-participating NCBs. Thelegal framework for this scheme is reflectedin the ﬁTARGET Guidelineﬂ, which is to
be published in the Official Journal of
the European Communities and also madeavailable on the ECB™s website.Relations with TARGET usersIn 2000 the ECB and the NCBs maintained anongoing dialogue with TARGET users in order
to enable them to make the best possibleuse of the system. Regular meetings of thenational TARGET User Groups were held.
These meetings bring together the NCBs andthe national banking communities. In addition,
meetings were organised at the Eurosystem
level. These ensured that the NCBs and
the ECB were aware of, and better able torespond to, participants™ business needs.682.2The correspondent central banking
modelThe CCBM came into operation on 4 January
1999. It was established to enable allEurosystem counterparties and TARGET
participants to use, on a cross-border basis,all eligible assets as collateral in eithermonetary policy or intraday credit operations.
Since the start of Stage Three of EMU, theCCBM has been the main instrument inthe cross-border use of collateral and it
is increasingly being employed. In 2000collateral submitted to the Eurosystem via
the CCBM represented 15%, on average, of

the total collateral provided. This percentageis remarkable when compared with the 3% of
collateral held in custody through link
arrangements between securities settlementsystems (SSSs), the CCBM™s only alternativefor transferring cross-border collateral (see
Chart 20). The remaining 82% of collateral isheld domestically.The total collateral provided to theEurosystem refers to the sum of domestic
collateral, cross-border collateral held via theCCBM and cross-border collateral held viathe links between SSSs. The first wave oflinks was approved in May 1999.Throughout the year, assets held in
custody by the Eurosystem through the

CCBM averaged 100 billion (on average114 billion was held by the ESCB). Themain collateral provider (acting as
correspondent central bank) was Italy, with36% of the total assets held through the
CCBM, followed by Germany with 17% and

Luxembourg and Belgium with 15% each. Thehigh amount of collateral provided byLuxembourg and Belgium is due to the fact
that Clearstream Luxembourg and Euroclear,the two international central securitiesdepositories (CSDs), are located in these
countries.The main users of collateral (acting as homecentral bank) were Germany, with 42% of
the collateral held through the CCBM,Luxembourg (16%), the Netherlands (15%)
and France (11%). Owing to the relative
scarcity of domestic collateral in Ireland andLuxembourg, foreign collateral held via theChart 20Developments in cross-border collateral as a percentage of total collateral provided
to the Eurosystem0%2%4%6%8%10%12%14%16%18%0%2%4%6%8%10%12%14%16%18%Jan.19992000
Apr.JulyOct.Jan.Apr.JulyOct.
linksCCBM69CCBM on a cross-border basis amounted to54% of all collateral held in Luxembourg bycounterparties and to 63% of that held in

Ireland.Of the two categories of assets eligible forEurosystem credit operations, also referredto as tier one and tier two assets, the
cross-border use of collateral mainly involves
tier one assets.Although the CCBM was designed as aninterim solution, it will continue to operateat least until the market has developedcomprehensive and fully effective alternativesfor the transfer of cross-border collateral.The establishment of direct links betweenSSSs has been an important first step in this
direction. However, the use of the links todate has not been as extensive as expected.As a matter of fact, only 29 of the 62 eligible

links are frequently and significantly used.The lack of delivery versus payment (DVP)
features and the lack of harmonisation of the
settlement procedures of domestic SSSs arethe reasons most frequently quoted by userswhen they explain the low use of links. In this
respect, the implementation of DVP featurescould lead to an increase in the use of links in
the future.3Foreign exchange operations and investment of foreign reserve
assetsThe Eurosystem is responsible for holding
and managing the foreign reserve assets ofthe EU Member States participating in EMU.Both the ECB and the NCBs hold and manage
foreign reserve assets.
3.1Foreign exchange operations of the
ECBIn 2000 the ECB and the NCBs on behalf ofthe ECB conducted foreign exchangeoperations that consisted, on the one hand,
of sales of foreign currency interest income,
and, on the other, of intervention operationsin the foreign exchange market.The investment of the foreign currencycomponent of the foreign reserve assets of
the ECB from the start of 1999 led to an
increase in their value by an amountcorresponding to over 2.5 billion at theend of August 2000, mostly on account ofinterest income. In order to maintain the
structure and risk profile of the balance sheet
of the ECB as it stood at the beginningof 1999, the Governing Council decided on31 August 2000 that inflows derived from the
interest income of the foreign reserve assetswould be sold against euro. These sales wereinitiated on 14 September 2000 and werespread over a number of days, so that theywere concluded in approximately one week.
On 22 September 2000 the ECB intervened inthe foreign exchange market for the first timesince the introduction of the euro. On theinitiative of the ECB, the monetary authorities
of the United States, Japan, Canada and theUnited Kingdom joined the ECB in a concertedintervention against the background of the

exchange rate developments described inChapter I. The concerted intervention wasfollowed by unilateral intervention by the ECB
on 3, 6 and 9 November, which were to beseen as a continuation of the concerted action.
3.2The foreign reserve assets of the
EurosystemAt the end of 2000 the ECB net foreignreserve assets amounted to 43.5 billion, ascompared with 46.8 billion at the end of1999. This change reflects various factorssuch as the sales of the interest income

earned on the ECB™s foreign reserves, theforeign exchange intervention carried out bythe ECB during the year and the quarterly
revaluation at market prices of the foreignreserves assets. The ECB can make furthercalls on the NCBs™ foreign reserve assets70under the conditions defined in secondaryEuropean Community legislation (CouncilRegulation (EC) No. 1010/2000 of 8 May

concerning further calls of foreign reserve
assets by the European Central Bank).The Governing Council has defined thecurrency distribution of the foreign reservesof the ECB, consisting of gold, US dollars and
Japanese yen, on the basis of prospectiveoperational needs and may change it if andwhen it deems this appropriate. There is no
active trading of the currency composition ofreserves for investment purposes, in orderto avoid any interference with the single
monetary and foreign exchange policy ofthe Eurosystem. In line with the CentralBank Gold Agreement of 26 September 1999,
which stipulated that the signatories wouldnot increase their activity in gold lending andgold futures and options markets, gold assets
continue not to be managed actively.The NCBs continue to manage their ownforeign reserves as they see fit, but theiroperations are subject, above a certain limit,to notification to or approval of the ECB, in
order to ensure consistency with the singlemonetary policy.As regards the foreign reserves of both theECB and the euro area NCBs, a template onﬁinternational reserves and foreign currency

liquidityﬂ is published monthly, with a one-month lag, in line with the IMF™s Special DataDissemination Standards, in addition to the
consolidated financial statement of theEurosystem which is published on a weeklybasis on the ECB™s website (www.ecb.int).3.3Developments in the Eurosystem™s
approach to foreign reserve
managementThe aim behind the management of the ECB™s
foreign reserves is to ensure that, at anypoint in time, the ECB has an adequate
amount of liquid resources at its disposal forany foreign exchange intervention, if andwhen the Governing Council decides that thisis necessary. When interventions take place,as was the case in 2000, the foreign currency
assets of the ECB are used. Liquidity andsecurity are therefore the basic requirements
for the investment of the ECB™s foreign
reserves. Subject to these constraints, theECB™s foreign reserves are managed tomaximise their value.The ECB™s foreign reserves are managed in a
decentralised manner by the euro area NCBs,
on the basis of key investment guidelines anda strategic benchmark determined by the
Governing Council and a tactical benchmark
decided by the Executive Board. In additionto the currency distribution, the ECB definesfour key parameters for the investment of its
foreign reserves. First, a two-level investmentbenchmark (i.e. a strategic benchmark anda tactical benchmark) for each currency;
second, permitted deviations from thesebenchmarks in terms of the interest raterisk; third, a list of eligible instruments and
operations; and, fourth, limits for credit riskexposures (see also Section 5). NCBs thenuse the leeway given to them by the deviation
bands and risk limits to maximise the returnon the portfolios they manage on behalf ofthe ECB, with continuous monitoring by the
ECB. When conducting the ECB™s investmentactivity, NCBs act on behalf of the ECB, on adisclosed agency basis, so that the ECB™s

counterparties can distinguish the operationscarried out by the NCBs on behalf of the
ECB from those carried out by NCBs while

managing their own reserves.Since its launch, this framework hasfunctioned satisfactorily, but work iscontinuously being carried out with a view torefining and improving it. This is the case
especially with regard to the selection ofeligible assets and instruments in which the
foreign reserves are invested. The range of
instruments was initially somewhat limitedand a prudent attitude will continue to beadopted. However, a gradual extension of
the permissible investment instruments hasbeen undertaken.714The ECB™s own funds management
The ECB has been endowed with an initialcapital of approximately 4,000 million. Theprincipal purpose of the capital is to provide theECB with own funds which should provide it
with sufficient income, while maintaining anappropriate level of security. Since these fundsare currently invested in euro-denominated
assets, it is of the utmost importance to preventany interference with the Governing Council™smonetary policy decisions. Thus, in order to
prevent the misuse of privileged information inthe management of the ECB™s own funds and toprotect the ECB™s reputation, a ﬁChinese wallﬂ
was established, i.e. a strict functional and
physical separation between the unit managingthe own funds and the other units of the ECB.
In addition, the ECB follows a relatively passiveinvestment approach, particularly in the moneymarket area, in order not to generate any

monetary policy signals.The decision-making bodies of the ECBdetermine the key parameters for theinvestment of own funds in the Europeanbond markets. Within that framework, the
aim is to maximise the return on the ownfunds portfolio.The list of eligible counterparties for theECB™s own funds investment and therelevant legal documentation, while prepared
separately from those relating to themanagement of the ECB™s foreign reserve
assets, meet the same criteria of prudence
and efficiency. In line with the gradual
extension of the range of permissibleinvestment instruments, the active use of
bond futures for managing own funds beganin 2000 and an automatic securities lendingprogramme for own funds was launched in

February 2001.5Risk management
5.1Introduction
The ECB and the Eurosystem NCBs incur
risks when managing assets, e.g. foreign

reserve assets and own capital, inimplementing monetary policy and in payment
systems operations. These risks are mainly of
a credit, market, liquidity and operationalnature. There is a framework in place foridentifying and managing these risks on an
integrated and centralised basis in line withbest market practices. The ECB also providesongoing assessments and analytical expertise
in risk management which feed into a dialogueat the Eurosystem level on risk management
practices. The main sources of risk, including

the type of operation and the method of
management, are described below.5.2Investment operations
The financial investments of the ECB consist ofthe ECB™s foreign currency reserves and owncapital, denominated in euro. The performanceand risks of the investment operations arereported regularly to the relevant portfoliomanagers and also to the senior decision-makerswithin the ECB and the Eurosystem.The ECB™s investments are mainly driven bycurrency distribution and strategic investment
benchmarks. The strategic benchmarks, ofwhich there is one for each currency portfolio,are constructed in-house and specify the
types of assets and appropriate maturities inwhich the portfolio managers can invest.Considerations of risk and return are at the
forefront of the decision-making processwhen these benchmarks are constructed.The performance of both the benchmarks and
the actual portfolios is measured in compliancewith the Association of Investment Management
and Research (AIMR) recommendations.
Investment performance is also analysed toidentify the sources of performance.
The ECB takes a prudent stance towards risk inits investment decisions. Great emphasis is
72placed on high creditworthiness and liquidity,and the latter is especially relevant for theforeign currency reserves. The ECB follows a
careful, analytical and proactive approach whichensures that the full risk implications of decisions
are understood. There is a detailed credit and
market limits system in place. Credit limits aredecided on a global basis for the ECB and thendistributed to the NCBs according to the
amount of funds they are managing on behalf ofthe ECB. Compliance is monitored centrally.Market risk limits are applied consistently
throughout the Eurosystem with all similar
portfolios subject to the same market riskconstraints, regardless of size. Liquidity risk is
also monitored and closely observed. Finally,the value at risk of all portfolios is measuredand reported regularly. The value at risk figure
captures and aggregates the most significantforms of price risk for the ECB™s investments.5.3Monetary policy and payment
systems operationsThe Eurosystem™s operations include monetarypolicy and payment systems operations
(principally via the TARGET system, through
the provision of intraday liquidity). The
Eurosystem is responsible for providing an
adequate risk control framework for theseoperations. Specifically, the Eurosystem incursa risk when a counterparty, in a contractual
relationship with the Eurosystem, is unableto meet its credit obligations.The Eurosystem ensures, through its riskcontrol framework, that only assets deemed tohave a sufficient credit quality are eligible as
collateral for its operations. In the assessmentof the credit standard of debt instruments,the Eurosystem takes into account, inter alia,
available ratings by market agencies and theNCBs™ own credit assessment systems, as well
as certain institutional criteria to ensure

particularly high protection for the holders. TheECB monitors the credit assessment providedby the NCBs™ credit assessment systems.In the event of the default of a counterparty,the Eurosystem can use collateral to recoverthe liquidity provided. It is in such situationsthat the Eurosystem incurs market riskassociated with the collateral received. The

Eurosystem™s risk control framework limitsmarket and liquidity risks by applying appropriateand consistent risk control measures, primarily
through haircuts and margin calls, to the assetsdelivered as collateral. To obtain an adequatelevel of risk control measures, the Eurosystem
evaluates, in line with best market practices,parameters such as current and potential price
developments and related price volatilities.

In this regard, the Eurosystem™s risk controlframework also provides mark-to-marketvaluation principles which are followed on a

daily basis in order to value the assets pledged
as collateral.In the course of 2000 some technical changes
were made to the risk control measuresapplied to eligible assets. The changes
introduced were purely technical and do notreflect changes in the collateral policy(i.e. eligibility criteria). Rather, they are aimed
mainly at giving more homogeneity to thelarge range of existing haircuts applied to tier
two assets. In this respect, four groups of

instruments with relatively homogeneous
liquidity characteristics have been identified.The revised risk control framework is also
intended to facilitate checking proceduresin the Eurosystem and to enhance thetransparency of the risk control framework.
For tier one assets, no changes have beenintroduced, but specific haircuts have beenintroduced for a particular kind of asset

(ﬁinverse floater securitiesﬂ).5.4Current developments
Efforts are being devoted to the continuedimprovement of the risk managementframework of the Eurosystem. Currentdevelopments include the adoption of a more
general treatment of liquidity risk of theassets underlying monetary policy andinvestment operations. Moreover, there have

been significant shifts towards monitoring thefinancial risks of the ECB across its balancesheet.73Greece
Designed by Marios Spilopoulos.Untitled
Chapter IIIEntry of Greece tothe euro area761 Monetary, financial and economic developments in Greece
On 19 June 2000 during the summit in SantaMaria da Feira the ECOFIN Councilconfirmed that Greece had fulfilled thenecessary conditions to adopt the single

currency as of 1 January 2001. The Councilbased its decision on the ConvergenceReports prepared by the ECB and the
European Commission, the opinion of the
European Parliament and a proposal from theEuropean Commission. On the same day the
Council also decided that the conversion ratebetween the drachma and the euro should beequal to the drachma™s central rate against

the euro in the exchange rate mechanismERM II, i.e. GRD 340.750 to the euro. Theconvergence of the drachma towards its
ERM II central rate had been facilitated
by a 3.5% revaluation of its central rate on
17 January 2000 and had de facto already
been successfully completed by mid-
December 2000, some days before the
irrevocable fixing of the conversion rate at
which the euro replaced the Greek drachmaon 1 January 2001.In 2000 Greece continued to experiencestrong output growth above the average forthe euro area. The rate of real GDP growth
in 2000 was 4.1%, compared with 3.4% in1999 (see Table 8). Growth was supported
by strong domestic demand. The growth of
private consumption accelerated from 2.9%in 1999 to 3.1% in 2000 and investmentgrowth picked up substantially from 7.3% to
9.3%. Public investment continued to benefitstrongly from the inflow of EU structuralfunds. The contribution of net exports to
growth, which was 0.2 percentage point ofGDP in 1999, turned negative to stand at-0.6 percentage point of GDP in 2000. Strong

domestic demand resulted in an accelerationin the growth rate of imports (mainly investmentgoods, raw materials and passenger cars)

from 3.9% in 1999 to 7.4% in 2000, onlypartly offset by the increase in exports. Inaddition, the considerable oil price increases
in 2000 and the appreciation of the US dollarmade imports significantly more expensive.The persistent and sizeable Greek goodstrade deficit was partially compensated forby substantial surpluses on the servicesaccount and by capital inflows in the formof both direct and portfolio investment.

Nevertheless, the Greek current plus newcapital account deficit rose to around 6.9% of
GDP in 2000.Employment is estimated to have grown by1.2% in 2000. This is a considerable
improvement compared with the negative
growth rate for employment recorded in1999 (-0.7%) and reflects the rapid
expansion of the economy. Moreover, it is
likely that recently introduced labour marketprogrammes will have a positive impact on
employment creation. Unemployment isestimated to have decreased from 12.0% in1999 to 11.3% in 2000. However, the lack of
timely employment data creates considerableuncertainty with regard to the actual labourmarket figures for 2000.The average rate of HICP inflation in Greeceduring 2000 was 2.9% against 2.1% in 1999.
The acceleration of inflation during 2000 wasstrongly influenced by the rise in oil pricesand the appreciation of the US dollar.
Furthermore, unit labour costs increased byaround 1.5% in 2000 compared with 0.6% in
1999, and the inflation-reducing impact of the

indirect tax cuts introduced in 1999 droppedout of the annual HICP rate. (For a discussionof the inflation differentials between Greece
and the euro area, see Box 8 in Chapter IV.)Fiscal consolidation continued in 2000. The
government budget deficit followed a
downward trend, declining from 1.8% of GDPin 1999 to 0.9% in 2000. The fiscal balance

improved considerably faster than previouslyexpected, which was mainly attributable tostrong tax revenues. The government debt
ratio is estimated to have decreased from
104.6% of GDP in 1999 to 103.9% in 2000.
This relatively small reduction is due to the

appreciation of the US dollar and the Japanese
yen throughout most of 2000 which increased
the drachma value of outstanding debt77denominated in foreign currencies and tofinancial operations such as equity injectionsinto state-owned enterprises. The Greek

Stability Programme, presented in December2000, outlines budget surplus targets of 0.5%and 1.5% of GDP for 2001 and 2002
respectively. Government debt is projectedto decline to 98.9% of GDP in 2001 andfurther to 96.0% in 2002.During 2000 the monetary policy of the Bank
of Greece continued to be geared towards
the achievement of price stability. At the sametime, the Bank of Greece aimed to secure asmooth transition to the euro, cutting its
official interest rates mainly towards the endof the year. In January 2000 the central bank™s14-day deposit rate stood at 9.75%. By June,
when the ECOFIN Council confirmed that
Greece had fulfilled the necessary conditionsto adopt the single currency, the Bank of
Greece had lowered its main refinancing rateto 8.25%. Following a number of intermediatesteps, this rate was reduced to 4.75% on27 December, thus bringing it fully into line
with the minimum bid rate for the mainrefinancing operations of the ECB. The Greekthree-month interest rate declined in parallel
and, by the end of 2000, the short-terminterest rate spread between Greece and theeuro area had completely disappeared.In February 2001 the spread between Greeklong-term interest rates (as measured by the
ten-year government bond yields) andcomparable euro area rates amounted to34 basis points, i.e. 56 basis points less than
in January 2000 when Greek long-terminterest rates stood at 6.6%. The resultingsmall spread in comparison with other euro
area bond yields demonstrates the success ofthe stability-oriented policies pursued inGreece.19941995199619971998199920002000200020002000
Q1Q2Q3Q4
Real GDP2.02.12.43.53.13.44.1....
Contribution to real GDP growth:
 1)
Real domestic demand including stocks1.13.73.53.95.13.24.7....
Net exports0.9-1.6-1.1-0.4-2.00.2-0.6....
HICP10.38.87.95.44.52.12.92.62.32.83.8
Compensation per employee10.812.28.813.56.04.84.5....

Unit labour costs, whole economy10.711.65.99.36.40.61.5....
Import deflator (goods and services)5.67.55.02.74.21.26.1....
Current plus new capital account (% of GDP) 2)
-0.1-2.5-3.7-4.0-3.0-4.1-6.9....
Total employment1.90.9-0.4-0.33.4-0.71.2....
Unemployment rate (% of labour force) 3)
8.99.19.89.711.212.011.3....
Fiscal balance (% of GDP) 4), 5)
-10.0-10.2-7.4-4.0-2.5-1.8-0.9....
Consolidated gross debt (% of GDP)
 4)
109.3108.7111.3108.3105.5104.6103.9....
Three-month interest rate (% per annum) 6)
26.716.413.812.913.910.37.98.98.57.96.2
Ten-year government bond yield(% per annum)6)...9.88.56.36.16.46.16.15.8
Exchange rate against the ECU or euro 6) , 7)
288303306309331326337333336338340
Table 8Macroeconomic indicators for Greece(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, national data and ECB calculations. Note: National accounts are according to the ESA 95.1)Percentage points.

2)Bank of Greece data (settlement basis); data for 2000 are provisional.

3)ESA 95 basis.

4)Consistent with the Maastricht Treaty definition.

5)General government surplus (+) / deficit (-).

6)Average of period values.

7)Units of national currency per ECU until the end of 1998; thereafter, per euro.
78Box 7Statistical implications of the enlargement of the euro area to include GreeceThe entry of Greece into the euro area represented the first occasion on which statistical series for the euroarea have needed to include an additional Member State. A range of statistical issues thus needed to beaddressed, concerning both data availability for the additional country and procedures for calculating the area-wide aggregates. To ensure smooth and timely availability of the new euro area statistics including Greece,
statistical preparations have been stepped up since the ECOFIN Council decided on 19 June 2000 that Greecefulfilled the criteria for participating in the single currency as of 1 January 2001. The preparation of statisticsfor the enlarged euro area has been co-ordinated, where necessary, with the European Commission to ensure

consistency in all statistical domains.In summary, the enlargement of the euro area to include Greece as from 1 January 2001 has two mainstatistical implications. First, residents of Greece have become residents of the euro area. Second, the Greekdrachma is a national denomination of the euro. Consequently, from a statistical perspective, the composition
of the ﬁrest of the worldﬂ and ﬁforeign currenciesﬂ has changed. This in turn affects all monetary, financial andother economic statistics for the euro area as a whole.For Greece this implied as from January 2001 an obligation to meet all the statistical requirements of the ECBas set out in Council Regulation (EC) No. 2533/98. The statistical requirements of the ECB are presented inthe document ﬁStatistical information collected and compiled by the ESCBﬂ (May 2000). The Bank of Greece,
as a member of the European System of Central Banks and the General Council of the ECB, was fullyinformed about the requirements of the ECB and was therefore ready to meet the statistical obligationscovering monetary, banking, balance of payments and other financial statistics. In addition, the Bank of
Greece had to carry out the necessary preparations for the integration of Greek credit institutions into the ECBminimum reserve system and to adapt the relevant statistical requirements.For the existing euro area members the enlargement of the euro area to include Greece implied that, fromJanuary 2001 onwards, they had to report transactions (or flows) and positions with residents of Greece as partof the euro area, instead of as transactions and positions with non-euro area residents. The Greek drachma has
to be recognised as a further national denomination of the euro until the completion of the transition to theeuro (i.e. until the replacement of banknotes and coins expressed in the national legacy currencies by the euro).During the second half of 2000 the ECB undertook all the necessary technical preparations for the dataexchange with the Bank of Greece. It also assisted in making the necessary amendments to the statisticalreporting framework of the existing euro area Member States. Regarding the publication of euro area statistics
by the ECB, as for example in the statistical section of the ECB Monthly Bulletin, reference statistical seriesrelating to the euro area will continue to cover the Member States making up the euro area at the time inquestion. This means that stock data, such as employment and Monetary Financial Institution (MFI) balance
sheet data, and flow data, such as balance of payments statistics, referring to periods up to and includingDecember 2000 cover the euro area of 11 participating countries, while data referring to periods or dates fromJanuary 2001 cover the extended euro area of 12 participating countries (i.e. including Greece). To the extent
possible, absolute and percentage changes for 2001 calculated from a base in 2000 make allowance for thechange in composition of the euro area.For analytical purposes, historical data for the 11 euro area countries plus Greece for a number of key serieshave been made available in the January 2001 issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin (pages 65* and 66* in theﬁEuro area statisticsﬂ section) and on the ECB™s website.79The Greek broad monetary aggregate M4N1grew by 10.4% in 2000, considerably abovethe 5-7% reference range set by the Bank of
Greece. There are a number of reasons forthe strong growth of M4N in 2000. First,there were a number of institutional changes
with regard to the treatment of repos.Second, M4N was affected by portfolioredistributions into money market funds
fuelled by the protracted decline in shareprices. Third, the economic expansion wasstronger than had been anticipated when the
reference range was computed. Domestic
credit also expanded rapidly during 2000,namely by 20.2% compared with 12.2% in
1999. This primarily reflected the rapid
growth in credit to the private sector,attributable to the removal of the temporary
reserve requirement on excess credit growthat the end of March 2000, the decline in
interest rates, the dynamic growth of the
economy and valuation differences on foreigncurrency loans.Following the achievement of its goal to adoptthe single currency, the main challenge forGreece is to ensure an appropriate national
policy mix. The economy is likely to continueits rapid growth, not least in view of the
expansionary impulse resulting from the
necessary relaxation of monetary conditionsin the run-up to euro area membership. In
order to counter inflationary pressures, the
Government needs to adopt a morerestrictive fiscal policy. Furthermore,continued wage moderation must be ensured
and further structural reforms must beintroduced without delay. In this respect,there is a continued need for further
legislative changes designed to address labour
market shortcomings. Moreover, it isimportant to accelerate social security system
reforms, to maintain the momentum of theprivatisation programme, to increase theefficiency of the public administration and to
ease the regulatory burden on the economy.1M4N was an official monetary aggregate of Greece prior to its
entry into the euro area. This concept did not fully coincide with
the euro area broad monetary aggregate M3.2Council Decision (EC) No. 427/2000 of 19 June 2000 in
accordance with Article 122 (2) of the Treaty on the adoption by
Greece of the single currency on 1 January 2001, OJ L 167,

7.7.2000, pp. 19-21.2Legal aspects of the integration of the Bank of Greece into the
EurosystemThe ECB and the Bank of Greece put in place
a number of legal instruments with a view to
ensuring the integration of the Bank ofGreece into the Eurosystem on 1 January
2001, the date on which Greece was to adopt
the euro. This adaptation of the Eurosystem™slegal framework was the consequence of thedecision taken by the EU Council on 19 June
2000 to abrogate the derogation of Greece.2Prior to the above-mentioned EU Council
Decision and pursuant to Article 122 (2) of

the Treaty, the ECB reviewed the statute ofthe Bank of Greece and relevant Greeklegislation in the light of Article 109 of the
Treaty. On the basis of its findings, the ECB™s
assessment of the compatibility of Greeklegislation with the Treaty and with the
Statute of the ESCB was favourable in theECB™s ﬁConvergence Report 2000ﬂ on
Greece and Sweden. The introduction of the
euro in Greece and the integration of theBank of Greece into the Eurosystem initiatedthe following legal changes. The Bank of
Greece amended its statute by removingcertain imperfections, which had been
detected in 1998. The Bank of Greece
consulted the ECB on its amended statute on24 March 2000. An ECB Opinion proposing
certain amendments to the draft statute ofthe Bank of Greece was adopted on 17 April2000. Consequently, following a consultation
by the Bank of Greece, on 27 June 2000 the
Governing Council of the ECB adopted anECB Opinion welcoming the provisions of
the law ratifying the statute of the Bank of
Greece. Like the national central banks ofthe other 11 euro area Member States in the
past, the Bank of Greece submitted for80consultation on 11 August 2000 a draft lawconcerning additional measures in relation to
Council Regulations (EC) Nos. 1103/97,
974/98 and 2866/98, on the introduction ofthe euro.3 On 1 September 2000 an ECB
Opinion was adopted which recognised the
successful efforts on the part of the nationallegislator to ensure the compatibility of thenational legislation with the Treaty and the
Statute of the ESCB.One of the repercussions of the EU CouncilDecision of 19 June 2000 was that the Council
Regulations concerning the introduction ofthe euro had to be amended by adding
Greece to the list of participating MemberStates and by determining the irrevocablyfixed exchange rate of the Greek drachma to
the euro.4 On 7 June 2000 the EU Council
consulted the ECB on proposals for threeCouncil Regulations amending the existing
ones containing provisions concerning the
introduction of the euro. The ECB providedits Opinion5 welcoming the proposals and
the EU Council adopted three Regulationsamending the existing ones in order to ensure
that Greece would be subject to the same
provisions as all other euro area MemberStates upon adoption of the euro.
6As regards the legal preparation for the
integration of the Bank of Greece andpursuant to Article 27.1 of the Statute of
the ESCB, the Governing Council adopteda Recommendation7 proposing external
auditors for the Bank of Greece for the

annual accounts starting from the financialyear 2001.8 Finally, the ECB reviewed its
legal framework and introduced, where
necessary, amendments resulting from thefact that the Bank of Greece would be a fully
participating national central bank as from
1 January 2001. The ECB also reviewed theGreek legal documentation implementing thelegal framework of the Eurosystem in the
areas of monetary policy and TARGET. Inparticular, the operating rules for HERMES,the system for the real-time settlement of
payment orders in euro managed by the Bank
of Greece, which is a component of TARGET,were reviewed and amended. The legaldocumentation of the Bank of Greece usedfor monetary policy operations was reviewedand amended to reflect the Guidelines on
monetary policy instruments and proceduresof the Eurosystem. A new ECB Regulationconcerning transitional provisions for the

application of minimum reserves by theEuropean Central Bank following theadoption of the euro by Greece9 entered
into force, as well as legal instruments forthe paying-up of the remaining capital and thetransfer by the Bank of Greece of foreign
reserves to the ECB.10 Finally, the ERM II
agreement was terminated for the Bank ofGreece.3Which later became Law 2842/2000, Government Gazette
207/27.9.2000, with effect from 1 January 2001.
4Council Regulation (EC) No. 974/98 of 3 May 1998 on the
introduction of the euro, OJ L 139, 11.5.1998, pp. 1-5; Council
Regulation (EC) No. 1103/97 of 17 June 1997 on certain
provisions relating to the introduction of the euro, OJ L 162,
19.6.1997, pp. 1-3; and Council Regulation (EC) No. 2866/98
of 31 December 1998 on the conversion rates between the
euro and the currencies of the Member States adopting the
euro, OJ L 359, 31.12.1998, pp. 1-2.5Opinion of the ECB of 16 June 2000 at the request of the
Council of the European Union pursuant to Article 123 (5) of

the Treaty establishing the European Community (CON/00/12),

OJ C 177, 27.6.2000, pp. 11-12.6Council Regulation (EC) No. 1478/2000 of 19 June 2000
amending Regulation (EC) No. 2866/98 on the conversion rates
between the euro and the currencies of the Member States
adopting the euro, OJ L 167, 7.7.2000, p. 1; Council Regulation
(EC) No. 2595/2000 of 27 November 2000 amending

Regulation (EC) No. 1103/97 on certain provisions relating to
the introduction of the euro, OJ L 300, 29.11.2000, p. 1; Council
Regulation (EC) No. 2596/2000 of 27 November 2000
amending Regulation (EC) No. 974/98 on the introduction of
the euro, OJ L 300, 29.11.2000, p. 2.7Recommendation of the ECB of 5 October 2000 on the external
auditors of the national central banks (ECB/2000/10),
2000/612/EC, OJ L 259, 13.10.2000, p. 65.8The Council adopted Council Decision (EC) No. 737/2000 of
20 November 2000 amending Decision 1999/70/EC concerning
the external auditors of the national central banks, OJ L 298,
25.11.2000, p. 23.9Regulation (EC) No. 2548/2000 of the ECB of 2 November
2000 concerning transitional provisions for the application of
minimum reserves by the European Central Bank following the
introduction of the euro in Greece, OJ L 291, 18.11.2000,
pp. 28-29.10Decision of the ECB of 16 November 2000 providing for the
paying-up of capital and the contribution to the reserves and
provisions of the ECB by the Bank of Greece, and for the initial
transfer of foreign-reserve assets to the ECB by the Bank of
Greece and related matters (ECB/2000/14), OJ L 336,
30.12.2000, pp. 110-117; and the Agreement of

16 November 2000 between the ECB and the Bank of Greece

regarding the claim credited to the Bank of Greece by the ECB
under Article 30.3 of the Statute of the ESCB and related
matters, OJ L 336, 30.12.2000, pp. 122-123.813Operational aspects of the integration of the Bank of Greece
into the EurosystemFollowing the decision by the EU Council on19 June 2000 to abrogate the derogation ofGreece, the ECB conducted technical
preparations, with a view to fully integratingthe Bank of Greece into the Eurosystem. Inline with the provisions of the Treaty, the
Bank of Greece has joined the Eurosystemwith exactly the same rights and obligationsas the national central banks (NCBs) of other
countries that had adopted the euro at itsinception.The preparations were conducted inco-operation with the Bank of Greece and,where appropriate, in a multilateral fashion
with the 11 NCBs of the Eurosystem.Technical preparations for the integration ofthe Bank of Greece into the Eurosystem
covered a wide range of issues, notably in thefields of financial reporting and accounting,monetary policy operations, foreign reserve
management and foreign exchangeoperations, payment systems, statistics andbanknote production. In the field of
operations, preparations involved theextensive testing of the instruments and
procedures for the implementation of the
monetary policy and foreign exchangeoperations of the Eurosystem. Theseextensive preparations were instrumental in
facilitating the smooth integration of theBank of Greece into the Eurosystem as of1 January 2001.3.1Monetary policy operations
The introduction of the euro in Greece on1 January 2001 meant that credit institutions
located in Greece became subject to theEurosystem™s reserve requirements as from
that date. A list of 57 Greek credit institutions
subject to the Eurosystem™s reserverequirements was published on the ECB™swebsite for the first time on 31 October
2000.The euro was introduced in Greece on1 January 2001, i.e. in the course of theregular Eurosystem reserve maintenance
period, which started on 24 December 2000and ended on 23 January 2001. This requiredtransitional provisions for the application of
minimum reserves in Greece during this
maintenance period. Indeed, the firstmaintenance period for Greek counterparties
only started on 1 January 2001 but ended on
the regular date of 23 January 2001.
On 1 January 2001, the accession of Greece
to the euro area increased the aggregatereserve requirements of euro area credit

institutions by 2.1 billion. The autonomousliquidity factors in the balance sheet of theBank of Greece, including the fixed-term

deposits mentioned below, contributed, on
average, an overall liquidity injection of1.5 billion in the period from 1 to 23 January2001. Hence, the net average liquidity deficitcontributed by Greece to the euro area inthis period amounted to 0.6 billion.Finally, in order to obtain a full picture of the
liquidity effects of the accession of Greece,
account has to be taken of the fact that someof the monetary policy operations conducted
by the Bank of Greece in 2000 only mature in
2001. These include some fixed-term deposits
with a maturity of up to 18 months, collected
from counterparties in order to achieve

a smoothing of the liquidity injectionstemming from the harmonisation of the
reserve requirements on drachma-denominated
deposits with those of the Eurosystem, aswell as from the abolition of the previous
system of special reserve requirements on
certain categories of foreign currency-denominated deposits in Greece prior to theintroduction of the euro.The impact of the accession of Greece oneuro area liquidity conditions was taken into

account by the ECB by adjusting the allotmentamounts in its main refinancing operations atthe beginning of 2001 accordingly.82The introduction of the euro in Greece wasalso reflected in the incorporation of Greekassets (either assets located in Greece or
assets initially denominated in Greekdrachmas) into the list of assets eligible ascollateral for the Eurosystem™s credit
operations. These assets were incorporatedin the list of eligible assets published on theECB™s website on 29 December 2000, and
they became effectively eligible on 1 January2001. Greek assets added a total of89.6 billion to the overall amount of assetseligible for the credit operations of the
Eurosystem.3.2Contribution to the ECB™s capital,
reserves and foreign reserve assetsUpon the establishment of the ECB inJune 1998, in common with other NCBs of
countries which did not adopt the euro atthe start of Stage Three of EMU, the Bank ofGreece paid up 5% of its subscribed capital
share in the ECB as a contribution to theECB™s operational costs. In accordance withArticle 49 of the ESCB Statute, as at 1 January
2001, the Bank of Greece paid up theremaining 95% of its subscription to the ECB™s
capital. The total subscribed share of the Bankof Greece amounts to 
102,820,000,equivalent to 2.0564% of the ECB™ssubscribed capital of 5 billion. The Bank ofGreece contributed further amounts to the
reserves of the ECB, and to provisions
equivalent to reserves, corresponding to itsparticipation in the ECB.At the beginning of 2001, the Bank of Greece
transferred foreign reserve assets to the ECB
in proportion, based on its share in the ECB™ssubscribed capital, to the foreign reserveassets transferred by other NCBs at the
beginning of 1999. The Bank of Greece wascredited with a corresponding claim on theECB. The contribution was made in
accordance with the rules and proceduresused for the initial transfer of foreign reserveassets by the 11 participating NCBs in 1999.

15% of the total contribution was made ingold, and the remaining 85% in those foreigncurrencies in which the ECB™s foreign reserve

assets are invested. Furthermore, the Bankof Greece was appointed as agent for theECB in the context of its foreign exchange

operations.83Les enfants de lÕunit” de p”diatrie de lÕInstitut Gustave Roussy et le Rire M”decin,France
Designed by Marine,Hugues,Tiphaine,Romain,Christine,Farid,Guillaume,
Foun”,Christelle,Magalie,Adel and Si-Amed.Untitled
Chapter IVEconomic developments in
the other countries of theEuropean Union86The Eurosystem and the NCBs of the non-participating EU countries co-operate closelyin the context of the General Council of the
ECB with a view to contributing to themaintenance of price stability in the EU as awhole. In this context, a regular review of
macroeconomic conditions as well as
monetary and exchange rate policies is anintegral part of the co-ordination exercise
between the Eurosystem and the three NCBscurrently not participating in the single
monetary policy. Although these NCBs
conduct their monetary policies underdifferent institutional and operationalframeworks, the ultimate goal of monetary

policy for all of them is to maintain price
stability.DenmarkReal GDP in Denmark grew by around 2.5%in 2000, up from 2.1% in 1999 (see Table 9).The rise in output growth was largely based

on a recovery of domestic demand, includingstocks, which had been subdued in 1999.Private consumption, however, remained
weak compared with other components of
domestic demand, as reflected, inter alia, in asignificant decline in car sales. The
contribution of net exports to real GDP
growth declined significantly in 2000. Anexceptional factor in 2000 was the severe

storm in late 1999 which resulted in the need
for substantial investments. The labourmarket continued to be relatively tight, as
the unemployment rate stabilised at around4.7%. Labour supply did not increasesignificantly and remains a key area of concern
in the medium term. Overall, the Danisheconomy conveys the impression of havingachieved more sustainable growth in 2000,
with reduced risks of overheating and a morebalanced composition of demand than inprevious years.Price developments in 2000 were mainlyaffected by large oil and import price
increases, in addition to effects from higherenergy taxation and food and public services
prices. Domestic inflationary pressures easedagainst a background of weaker hourly wage
growth, with profit margins nonetheless beingsqueezed by rising oil and import prices.
Overall, the rate of increase in theHarmonised Index of Consumer Prices(HICP) remained relatively stable at around
2.8% throughout the year, implying aconvergence with the level of inflation in the
euro area. The annual average inflation rate
was 2.7% in 2000, up from 2.1% in 1999.Despite some moderation, wage costscontinued to increase faster than in the euro

area. Without a further easing of wage
growth, competitiveness could continue to
deteriorate. (For a more detailed discussion
of the inflation differentials between the non-participating EU countries and the euro area,see Box 8.)Public finances in Denmark continued to bein a strong position in 2000. Despite a slightly
lower general government surplus than in the
previous year, government debt continued todecline. The general government surplus was

2.5% of GDP in 2000, down from 3.1% in
1999. Following the restrictive effects of theso-called Whitsun tax package, fiscal policy
was eased slightly in 2000. According tothe update of Denmark™s ConvergenceProgramme, presented in December 2000,
the surplus is expected to remain relativelystable and the fiscal policy stance is predictedto be tightened somewhat in the coming
years. The government debt ratio fellto 47.3% of GDP in 2000, down by5.3 percentage points compared with 1999.
On 28 September, a majority of Danish votersrejected the adoption of the euro in a
referendum. However, Denmark remains amember of ERM II without any change in themonetary policy strategy of Danmarks
Nationalbank. The Government and
Danmarks Nationalbank issued a jointstatement announcing that they would
continue to pursue the fixed exchange ratepolicy vis-à-vis the euro within the frameworkof the narrow band of ERM II. The
Government also stated its intention to standready to tighten fiscal policy if necessary.Given the fixed exchange rate policy,87developments in key official and short-termmarket interest rates should primarily be seenagainst the background of the interest rate
decisions of the Governing Council of theECB and developments in the exchange rateof the Danish krone against the euro. The

Danish krone remained stable in 2000, ataround a level marginally stronger than itsERM II central rate of DKK 7.46038 against
the euro. The only factor generating somevolatility in the DKK exchange rate againstthe euro, countered by foreign exchange
interventions and key interest rate changes,was the run-up to and the aftermath of thereferendum on Denmark™s adoption of the

euro. From early 2000 until the referendum,Danmarks Nationalbank raised its lending rateby a total of 1.8 percentage points to 5.1%,
broadly following similar interest rateincreases by the Eurosystem. However,following the referendum on the euro, the
lending rate was increased by 0.5 percentagepoint in order to avoid uncertaintyconcerning the krone. The krone remainedbroadly stable after the referendum and the

lending rate was reduced by a total of0.2 percentage point, in line with a gradualstrengthening of the krone. In 2000 short-

term interest rates, as measured by thethree-month money market rate, rose by1.6 percentage points, and the spread
vis-à-vis the comparable euro area ratesremained broadly stable at around 40 basispoints, with the exception of the periods

before and after the referendum when it washigher. At the end of February 2001 short-
term interest rates stood at 5.2%, constituting

a spread of 40 basis points against euro arearates.Long-term interest rates, as measured byten-year government bond yields, followedthe trend in the international capital markets,
with the positive interest rate differential19941995199619971998199920002000200020002000
Q1Q2Q3Q4
Real GDP5.52.82.53.02.82.12.52.63.42.7.
Contribution to real GDP growth:
 1)
Real domestic demand including stocks6.53.92.14.64.4-0.6.2.43.22.3.
Net exports-1.0-1.20.4-1.7-1.72.8.0.20.20.4.
HICP1.82.02.11.91.32.12.72.82.92.62.6
Compensation per employee3.53.53.33.53.84.2.3.44.34.1.
Unit labour costs, whole economy-2.21.42.11.92.33.0.1.92.61.6.
Import deflator (goods and services)0.71.2-0.12.2-1.10.6.7.79.010.7 .
Current plus new capital account (% of GDP)...0.1-0.10.20.20.20.20.50.0
Total employment1.40.50.61.21.31.10.91.01.50.0.
Unemployment rate (% of labour force)8.27.36.85.65.25.24.74.84.64.74.8
Fiscal balance (% of GDP) 2), 3)-2.6-2.3-1.00.41.13.12.5....
Consolidated gross debt (% of GDP)
 2)
76.572.165.161.455.852.647.3....
Three-month interest rate (% per annum) 4)
6.26.13.93.74.13.34.93.84.65.75.4
Ten-year government bond yield(% per annum)4)7.88.37.26.34.94.95.65.85.75.75.4
Exchange rate against the ECU or euro 4), 5)
7.547.337.367.487.507.447.457.457.467.467.45
Table 9Macroeconomic indicators for Denmark(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, national data and ECB calculations.Note: National accounts are according to the ESA 95. HICP data before 1995 are estimates based on national definitions and are
not fully comparable with HICPs starting in 1995.
1)Percentage points.

2)Consistent with the Maastricht Treaty definition.

3)General government surplus (+) / deficit (-).

4)Average of period values.

5)Units of national currency per ECU until the end of 1998; thereafter, per euro.
88vis-à-vis comparable euro area interest ratesremaining relatively constant at around 20-30basis points. Throughout the year, long-term
interest rates remained relatively stable ataround 5.7% before declining to 5.2% at theend of the year. In February 2001 the spread
vis-à-vis the average euro area ratesamounted to around 10 basis points,i.e. broadly unchanged since the beginning of
2000.SwedenReal GDP in Sweden continued to growstrongly in 2000. Output growth was up by3.6%, compared with 4.1% in 1999 (see Table
10). As in the two preceding years, output

growth was driven mainly by domesticdemand, including stocks. Domestic demandcontinued to be supported by rising
employment and real wages, a relaxation ofthe fiscal policy stance and increasinghousehold wealth. Private consumption, in
particular, grew strongly by 4.1%, while bothexports and imports of goods and servicesfollowed the trend in world trade and
increased by around 10%. The contributionof net exports to GDP growth remainedpositive at 0.9 percentage point, but was
down from 1.1 percentage points in 1999.The unemployment rate declined further to
5.1% of the labour force in December,
compared with an average of 7.2% in 1999.Employment grew by 2.2% in 2000 and, as
before, new jobs mainly originated in the
private services sector. At the same time, the
labour force increased as the number oflabour market programmes was scaled down
and fewer people stayed in education. The
number of job vacancies also rose rapidly andit took increasingly longer to fill them.
Despite some signs of labour shortages inthe construction and services sectors, as wellas for skilled technicians in manufacturing,
there was not yet a general situation of labourshortages.Annual inflation rates, as measured both bythe HICP and the CPI excluding interest
expenditure and direct effects of alteredindirect taxes and subsidies (UND1X),1remained relatively low and stable in 2000despite the increase in oil and import prices
and rapid output growth. The annual averageHICP inflation rate was 1.3%, up from 0.6% in1999. Sweden thus remained among the EU
countries with the lowest inflation ratesthroughout the year. The reasons for therelatively subdued price developments can be
found in the dampening effects of theliberalisation of public utilities, low rent
increases, a reduction of the profit share, and
possibly a lower level of resource utilisationthan previously thought. The profit share hasbeen falling back to the long-term average
for a number of years, indicating that furtherincreases in unit labour costs could be moredifficult to accommodate in the profit share.
Wage developments thus remain an areaof concern in terms of maintainingcompetitiveness, employment growth and
price stability.The fiscal surplus of the Swedish generalgovernment increased to 4.0% of GDP in
2000, compared with 1.8% in 1999. Thegovernment debt ratio also improved
significantly, falling from 65.2% of GDP in
1999 to 55.6% in 2000. The updated SwedishConvergence Programme, presented in

November 2000, sets the estimated budgetsurpluses for 2001 and 2002 at 3.5% and3.3% of GDP respectively. The debt ratio is
projected to decline to 53.2% of GDP in 2001and further to 48.9% in 2002.
Sveriges Riksbank operates with a flexibleexchange rate regime and has conductedmonetary policy with an explicit inflation

target since 1993. Monetary policy is targetedat keeping CPI inflation at 2%, with a
tolerance margin of plus or minus
1 percentage point. In 2000 the repo ratewas increased twice, on 4 February, by0.50 percentage point, and on 7 December,
by 0.25 percentage point to 4.0%. Thedecision in December originated from the1In Sweden headline CPI is the target variable. However, since
transient factors are taken into account, monetary policy decisions
have in practice been based on an assessment of UNDIX.89assessment that the risk of inflation beingabove the target of 2% in two years™ time had
increased. Short-term interest rates remainedlargely stable throughout 2000 and in the
first two months of 2001 at around 4%, alevel almost 70 basis points below comparableeuro area short-term interest rates at the

end of February 2001. After havingappreciated in the first part of 2000, thekrona depreciated against the euro in the
second half of the year. This was partlyassociated with the negative short-terminterest rate differential, but was also due to

stock market volatility and portfolioadjustments linked to the pension reform,which allows individuals to invest their
pension premiums in various domestic andinternational pension funds.Long-term interest rates declined by around1 percentage point in the course of 2000 andstood at 4.9% by the end of February 2001.The ten-year spread vis-à-vis euro areainterest rates turned negative from 20 basispoints above the latter at the beginning of
the year to 20 basis points below at the end
of the year. At the end of February 2001 thenegative spread was 10 basis points.United KingdomIn the United Kingdom real GDP grew by
3.0% in 2000, compared with 2.3% in 1999.Output growth peaked in the second quarter
of 2000 and decelerated thereafter (see
Table 11). Household consumption remainedthe main contributor to output growth, but
export demand was also strong, particularlyin the first half of the year.Real household consumption grew by 3.7% in2000, down from 4.5% in 1999. Increased
real earnings, lower unemployment and high19941995199619971998199920002000200020002000
Q1Q2Q3Q4
Real GDP4.13.71.12.13.64.13.64.24.13.72.3
Contribution to real GDP growth:
 1)
Real domestic demand including stocks3.01.80.70.73.93.02.73.43.43.60.5
Net exports1.21.90.41.4-0.31.10.90.80.70.11.8
HICP2.92.70.81.81.00.61.31.21.21.31.5
Compensation per employee4.82.86.83.83.31.37.08.36.47.16.3
Unit labour costs, whole economy-0.10.55.10.70.9-0.45.55.74.55.36.7
Import deflator (goods and services)4.05.9-4.20.7-0.51.45.95.65.16.26.7
Current plus new capital account (% of GDP)....0.60.50.50.70.30.50.7
Total employment-0.91.6-0.6-1.11.52.22.21.52.12.13.1
Unemployment rate (% of labour force)9.48.89.69.98.37.25.96.56.05.75.4
Fiscal balance (% of GDP) 2), 3)
-10.9-6.8-3.4-1.51.91.84.0....
Consolidated gross debt (% of GDP)
 2)
79.077.676.073.071.865.255.6....
Three-month interest rate (% per annum) 4)
7.78.86.04.44.43.34.14.04.14.14.1
Ten-year government bond yield(% per annum) 4)
9.710.28.06.65.05.05.45.85.35.35.1
Exchange rate against the ECU or euro 4), 5)
9.169.338.518.658.908.828.458.508.278.408.61
Table 10Macroeconomic indicators for Sweden(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, national data and ECB calculations.Note: National accounts are according to the ESA 95.
1)Percentage points.

2)Consistent with the Maastricht Treaty definition.

3)General government surplus (+) / deficit (-).

4)Average of period values.

5)Units of national currency per ECU until the end of 1998; thereafter, per euro.
90house prices contributed to the strength ofconsumer demand. After having peaked inthe third quarter, there were some signs that
consumption growth eased in the last quarterof 2000 following a much weakerperformance by the stock markets. Gross
fixed capital formation grew by 2.3% in 2000,down from 5.4% in 1999, and growth in
business investment was weak in the first half
of the year, before picking up strongly in thelast quarter. Export volumes grew rapidly,
but the pace decelerated in the second half
of the year, following the path of worlddemand. Import growth remained robustthroughout most of the year, reflecting both
buoyant domestic demand and the strengthof the pound sterling vis-à-vis the euro.
Employment grew quickly in the first half ofthe year and levelled off in the second. The
unemployment rate stabilised at just below
5.5% in the second half of 2000, down fromaround 6% at the end of the previous year.After reaching a peak in February 2000,
primarily owing to the effect of bonuses,

earnings growth decelerated in the months
to July to an annual rate of 3.9%, beforepicking up again in the second half of the year
to reach an annual rate of 4.4% at the end of2000.2 Unit labour costs decelerated, both as
a result of slower growth in labour
compensation and because productivitygrowth picked up in the course of 2000, after
having reached a low of 1% in 1999.Notwithstanding strong output growth andsome evidence of capacity constraints, the

RPIX inflation rate remained well below the2.5% target throughout the year. Measured
by the HICP, inflation fell from 1.3% in 1999

to 0.8% in 2000.  The slow growth of import
2Wage growth is derived from data from national sources not
included in Table 11.19941995199619971998199920002000200020002000
Q1Q2Q3Q4
Real GDP4.42.82.63.52.62.33.03.13.53.02.5
Contribution to real GDP growth:
 1)
Real domestic demand including stocks3.51.83.03.84.73.83.93.24.84.52.9
Net exports0.91.0-0.5-0.3-2.0-1.5-0.90.0-1.4-1.5-0.5
HICP2.02.72.51.81.61.30.80.80.60.80.9
Compensation per employee3.13.13.44.45.04.63.64.73.33.23.4

Unit labour costs, whole economy-0.31.01.92.83.43.51.62.61.01.31.7
Import deflator (goods and services)3.16.10.3-6.7-6.3-2.51.0-0.30.51.02.9
Current plus new capital account (% of GDP)-0.5-0.90.12.70.1-3.4.-5.2-4.3-5.8.
Total employment0.90.71.12.01.11.31.01.01.21.10.8
Unemployment rate (% of labour force)9.68.78.27.06.36.15.55.95.65.45.3
Fiscal balance (% of GDP) 2), 3)
-6.8-5.8-4.4-2.00.41.31.3....
Consolidated gross debt (% of GDP)
 2)
50.652.552.751.148.045.741.0...
Three-month interest rate (% per annum) 4)
5.56.76.06.87.35.46.16.16.26.16.0
Ten-year government bond yield(% per annum) 4)
8.28.37.97.15.65.05.35.65.35.35.1
Exchange rate against the ECU or euro 4), 5)
0.780.830.810.690.680.660.610.610.610.610.60
Table 11Macroeconomic indicators for the United Kingdom(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, national data and ECB calculations.Note: National accounts are according to the ESA 95. HICP data before 1995 are estimates based on national definitions and are
not fully comparable with HICPs starting in 1995.
1)Percentage points.

2)Calendar year estimates. Consistent with the Maastricht Treaty definition.

3)Calendar year estimates. General government surplus (+) / deficit (-).

4)Average of period values.

5)Units of national currency per ECU until the end of 1998; thereafter, per euro.
91Box 8Inflation differentials between the non-participating EU countries and the euro areaHICP inflation differentials between the four non-euro area EU Member States and the euro area averageranged from -1.6 to +0.5 percentage points in 2000. In the two ERM II countries, Denmark and Greece,
inflation was somewhat higher than the euro area average, but the spreads remained relatively small whencompared with those of the 1990s. They were also small when compared with the inflation spreads within the
euro area. Sweden and the United Kingdom experienced low inflation rates in 2000, despite strong outputgrowth in recent years; HICP inflation in both these countries was below that of the best performing euro areaMember State.When looking at the components of HICP inflation, it is found that the relative inflation performance of thefour countries vis-à-vis the euro area was very different for industry and services. In all four non-euro area
countries, HICP inflation for industrial products (excluding energy and food) was lower than in the euro area.In the case of the United Kingdom, HICP inflation in industry was more than 4 percentage points below that of
the euro area. HICP inflation for services, however, was higher in the non-participating EU countries than inthe euro area, with the exception of Sweden. The highest inflation rate for services was recorded in Denmark,where it stood almost 2 percentage points above that of the euro area.This common pattern of relatively low HICP inflation in industry and higher inflation in services, as comparedwith the euro area, seems to be at least partly related to deviating exchange rate movements and labour costInflation indicators relative to the euro area(spread of annual growth rates vis-à-vis euro area growth rates in 2000 in percentage points)Sources: Eurostat, ECB calculations and estimates.Note: ﬁEffective depreciationﬂ is defined as the inverse of the change in the effective exchange rate. All variables refer to annualaverages. Import deflator, compensation per employee and unit labour costs refer to the average of the first three quarters of 
2000for Denmark and are based on ECB annual growth estimates for the euro area. For Sweden, compensation per employee is
defined as wages and salaries per employee and unit labour costs are equal to unit wage and salary costs.-16-14-12-10-8-6
-4-2024-16
-14-12-10-8-6
-4-2024GreeceDenmarkSwedenUnited Kingdom
HICP totalHICP industryeffective depreciationimport deflatorHICP servicescompensation per employeeunit labour costs92prices as a result of the appreciation of thepound sterling vis-à-vis the euro may havecontributed significantly to keeping inflation
low (see Box 8). Strong import pricecompetition and lower export marginsaffected profit margins, particularly in the
manufacturing sector. The net rate of returnof manufacturing companies in the thirdquarter is estimated to have been at its lowest
level since 1993.The general government budget surplus as apercentage of GDP is estimated to have
remained at 1.3% in 2000, approximately the
same as in 1999 (excluding receipts from
UMTS licences). The update of the UnitedKingdom™s Convergence Programme,presented in December 2000, projected agovernment budget in balance by 2002, inline with the Government™s long-term fiscal
targets. According to the Programme, there
is a projected rise in spending, in particularfor the Government™s priority areas of health,education and transport. Capital expenditure
is expected to increase markedly as a resultof the Government™s commitment to doubleits net investment as a proportion of GDP.
The government debt ratio fell in 2000 to anestimated 41.0% of GDP from 45.7% in 1999.
It is projected to fall to 36.5% by 2002.
The Bank of England conducts monetarypolicy within a flexible exchange rate regime
with an explicit inflation target, set by theUnited Kingdom Government at 2.5%. In2000, the repo rate was raised in Januarydevelopments in 2000 (see chart above). A number of other country-specific factors, not depicted in the chart,are also likely to have played a role, such as rises in prices of public services in Denmark or developments in
indirect taxes in Greece.The annual average nominal effective exchange rates of non-participating EU countries did not depreciate as
markedly as that of the euro area; in the case of the United Kingdom, the annual average nominal effectiveexchange rate appreciated in 2000. For the two ERM II countries, this less marked depreciation was the resultof differences in their trade patterns by comparison with the euro area. For Sweden and the United Kingdom,
there was an additional effect from the appreciation of the respective bilateral exchange rates of the krona and
the pound sterling vis-à-vis the euro. Stronger currencies were generally reflected in lower import priceinflation, affecting both input costs and competition in output markets for tradeable products. In the case of the
United Kingdom, the import deflator rose in 2000 by 7.2 percentage points less than that of the euro area. Therelative strength of the pound sterling has therefore contributed significantly to the more favourable inflationperformance of the United Kingdom in industrial goods.By contrast, the rise in compensation per employee and unit labour costs was greater in all four countries thanin the euro area. This is likely to have contributed to the comparatively high HICP inflation for services of
these countries. Sweden is the exception in this case, as it combined low HICP inflation for services of just 1%with an increase in compensation per employee and in unit labour costs above that of the euro area average.The explanation for this can be found primarily in the price-dampening effects of liberalisation in the public
utilities sector.To summarise, all four non-participating EU countries appear to have experienced externally generated andmore domestically generated inflationary pressures than the euro area in 2000. Certainly in the UnitedKingdom, the appreciation of the pound sterling and the concomitant fall in consumer prices for industrialgoods were critical in keeping HICP inflation at the lowest level among the EU Member States. In Sweden,
low services price inflation, related to the liberalisation process in the public utilities sector, contributedsignificantly to the environment of price stability. Denmark and Greece had inflation rates above those of theeuro area in the services sector, which was probably related to stronger increases in wage and unit labour
costs.93and February, on both occasions by0.25 percentage point, amid concerns aboutfuture inflationary pressures, and was left
unchanged at 6.0% throughout the rest of
2000. In February 2001, the Bank of Englandlowered its repo rate by 0.25 percentage
point to 5.75%. Short-term interest rates
remained around 6.0% throughout 2000,before falling to around 5.5% at the end of

February 2001, around 0.8 percentage pointabove euro area short-term rates. Long-terminterest rates fell from around 5.8% at the
beginning of 2000 to 4.8% at the end of
February 2001, which was around the samelevel as euro area rates.
After having appreciated against the euro inlate 1999 and during the first four months of2000, the pound sterling depreciated against
the euro throughout May and June, from itsstrongest level of GBP 0.57 to GBP 0.63.From late June to the end of the year, the
pound sterling rebounded strongly beforelosing ground to the euro. At the end ofFebruary 2001, it stood at GBP 0.64.Our LadyÕs Hospital for Sick Children,Ireland
Designed by Eamonn Coleman.Untitled
Chapter VEuropean, internationaland bilateral issues961European issues
In 2000 the ECB continued to maintain and
develop its relations with the institutions andbodies of the European Community. Inparticular, through its participation in
meetings of the ECOFIN Council, theEurogroup, the Economic and FinancialCommittee (EFC) and the Economic Policy
Committee (EPC), the ECB continued toengage in a constructive dialogue withrepresentatives of the Member States and
the European Commission, at both thepolitical level and the technical level.
1At the political level, the ECB™s contacts with
EU and, in particular, euro area financeministers took place primarily through its
participation in meetings of the ECOFINCouncil and the Eurogroup. In accordancewith Article 113 (2) of the Treaty, the ECB is

invited to attend meetings of the ECOFINCouncil ﬁwhenever matters are discussedwhich relate specifically to the tasks and
objectives of the ESCBﬂ. In 2000 such matterspertained to, inter alia, the enactment of thelegislation necessary for Greece to adopt the

euro, the joint ECB-Eurostat action plan onstatistical requirements in EMU, and theECOFIN Council™s discussion of the exchange

rate strategies of countries applying formembership of the EU. While the ECB™sparticipation in meetings of the ECOFIN
Council depended on the issues underdiscussion, the ECB took part in all themeetings of the Eurogroup so as to regularly
discuss with the euro area finance ministersand the European Commission mattersrelated specifically to the single currency.At the technical level, the ECB has continued
to contribute to the analysis and advice
provided to the ECOFIN Council and the
Eurogroup by both the EFC and the EPC.While the ECB™s participation in meetings of
the EFC derives directly from Article 114 ofthe Treaty, its participation in meetings ofthe EPC was, until September 2000, based
solely on an invitation from the Chairman ofthe EPC. However, with the adoption by the
ECOFIN Council of a new EPC statute on
29 September 2000, the ECB™s participationin meetings of the EPC has now been put onan equal legal footing with that of the MemberStates and the European Commission.As a participant in meetings both of the EFCand of the EPC, the ECB took part in the
regular, ongoing work conducted in thecontext of the Community™s variouseconomic policy procedures and multilateral
surveillance exercises. In particular, the ECBwas involved in the preparation of the BroadEconomic Policy Guidelines and the
assessment of the Member States™ stabilityand convergence programmes. Furthermore,
the ECB provided input into discussions on a
number of issues, such as the impact of ageingpopulations on public finances, thecontribution of public finances to growth and
employment, and the development ofstructural performance indicators, on whichwork was mandated by the Lisbon Special
European Council on employment, economicreform and social cohesion (see below).2The ECB has also continued to participate in
the twice-yearly Macroeconomic Dialogue
(MED), which brings together representatives
not only of the Member States, the European
Commission, the ECB and the non-euro areacentral banks, but also of European
employers™ organisations and trade unions. In2000 the MED continued to develop as aforum in which representatives of all the
major actors which decide on or influencepolicy-making at the macroeconomic level canusefully exchange views, both on the
economic outlook and on the policychallenges ahead.From among the broad range of issues dealtwith in European institutions and bodies in 2000,
1The ECB™s relations with the European Parliament are dealt with
separately in Chapter XI of this Annual Report.2The ECB™s involvement in more specialised working groups and
committees is discussed in the relevant chapters of this Annual
Report.97the following developments are highlighted asbeing of particular significance from an economic
and institutional point of view.1.1The role of the Eurogroup
The Eurogroup (formerly the Euro-11 Group)was established by the Luxembourg European
Council in December 1997, as an informalbody in which the finance ministers of theeuro area Member States could meet among
themselves to discuss ﬁissues connected withtheir shared specific responsibilities for thesingle currencyﬂ. The European Council also
envisaged that the European Commission, andﬁwhen appropriateﬂ the ECB, would beinvited to take part in these meetings. In
practice, since the beginning of Stage Threeof EMU, not only the European Commission,but also the ECB has been invited to and has

participated in all Eurogroup meetings.Meetings of the Eurogroup have thereforetended to serve a dual purpose. First and

foremost, the Eurogroup is a forum in which
euro area finance ministers can discusstogether and, where necessary, co-ordinate
their economic policies. Second, theEurogroup, being of an informal nature, hasprovided a particularly appropriate setting
for the ongoing dialogue between ministers,the European Commission and the ECB, in
which they can regularly share their
assessments of the economic situation in theeuro area and of forthcoming policychallenges. In order to increase the visibility
of the Eurogroup to the general public, the
euro area finance ministers agreed on thefollowing initiatives in 2000.First, as and when the Eurogroup ministersconsider it appropriate to communicate their

shared views to markets and to the public at
large, this is to be achieved in as clear andconcise a manner as possible by the publication
of statements or communiqués. Two such
statements were released during 2000, bothof them expressing the shared concern, not
only of the Eurogroup but also of theCommission and the ECB, regarding the lowlevel of the exchange rate of the euro.
Second, it was decided that each Eurogroup
meeting should be followed by a pressconference to be given by the Eurogroup

President. These press conferences serve toprovide information about which issues havebeen discussed and to communicate the views
of the Eurogroup to interested members ofthe public. When appropriate, the President of
the ECB also attends these press conferences.1.2The Lisbon Special European
Council on employment, economicreform and social cohesion
On 23 and 24 March 2000 the EuropeanCouncil held a special meeting in Lisbon
dedicated to employment, economic reform
and social cohesion. At this meeting, theHeads of State or Government set the EUa new strategic goal for the next decade,

defined in the Council™s conclusions as beingﬁto become the most competitive anddynamic knowledge-based economy in the
world capable of sustainable economicgrowth with more and better jobs and greatersocial cohesionﬂ. In order to achieve this
ambitious goal, an overall strategy wasdefined. This strategy is based on thefollowing three elements: to prepare the
transition to a knowledge-based economy, to
modernise the European social model, and tosustain a healthy economic outlook by the
pursuit of appropriate macroeconomicpolicies.Within the context of the common efforts toprepare the transition to a competitive anddynamic knowledge-based economy, the ECB
attaches particular importance to the objectiveof providing a framework for 
efficient andintegrated financial markets. In this respect, the
European Council agreed to accelerate the
completion of the Single Market for financial
services, inter alia by setting a timetable whereby
the Risk Capital Action Plan should becompleted by 2003 and the Financial ServicesAction Plan by 2005.With regard to the attainment of the overallstrategic objectives, the European Council98agreed that no new processes were neededto implement the Lisbon strategy. Rather,existing processes such as the Broad
Economic Policy Guidelines and theLuxembourg, Cardiff and Cologne Processesalready offered the necessary instruments.
These processes could, however, bereinforced by laying down guidelines with
specific timetables, establishing quantitative
and qualitative indicators and benchmarks,more effectively translating Europeanguidelines into national and regional policies
and undertaking periodic monitoring,evaluation and peer review, organised as amutual learning process. Moreover, the
European Council outlined its intention totake ﬁa pre-eminent guiding and co-ordinatingroleﬂ and to ﬁhold a meeting every spring
devoted to economic and social questionsﬂ.The ECB welcomes the impetus given by theEuropean Council to the economic reformprocess. The dedication of almost an entire
European Council meeting to economic and
social questions, and the decision to holdsuch meetings annually from now on,illustrate the importance attached by the
Heads of State or Government to ongoingstructural reforms. The success of the ﬁLisbonstrategyﬂ will, of course, ultimately depend

on the timely and comprehensiveimplementation of the various policy
measures identified. Nonetheless, the ongoing
structural reform efforts benefit fromthe full political backing of the EuropeanCouncil.1.3Intergovernmental Conference
In line with the ﬁProtocol on the institutionswith the prospect of enlargement of the
European Unionﬂ, as annexed to theAmsterdam Treaty, and the conclusions ofthe Helsinki European Council of December
1999, a ﬁconference of representatives of thegovernments of the Member Statesﬂ wasconvened in early 2000. The stated objective
of this Intergovernmental Conference (IGC)to revise the Treaties was to prepare theEuropean institutions for enlargement, with a
view to ensuring the proper functioning ofthe Community™s decision-making bodies andprocesses after expanding to include 12 or
more new Member States. To this end, themandate of the IGC comprised five specificitems:the extension of qualified majority voting
(QMV) in the EU Council;the size and composition of the European
Commission;the weighting of votes in the EU Council;the review of the provisions on ﬁcloser

co-operationﬂ; andother necessary amendments to theTreaties arising with regard to the
European institutions.The expansion of the membership of the EU
to 27 or more Member States will have animmediate effect on the composition and
functioning of the institutions of theCommunity, such as the EU Council, theEuropean Commission, the European
Parliament, the different Courts and theconsultative committees. By contrast, thenew Member States are not expected to join

the euro area immediately upon theiraccession to the EU, but only after havingdemonstrated their capability to fulfil the
Maastricht convergence criteria in asustainable manner. Nevertheless, from a
medium to longer-term perspective, the
Eurosystem Œ and the Governing Councilof the ECB as its supreme decision-makingbody Œ will also have to be prepared for a
potentially significant increase in the numberof Member States adopting the euro.Treaty changes pertaining to institutional
aspects of the ESCB and the ECBThe Treaty of Nice Œ which resulted fromthe IGC Œ also deals with the institutional
aspects of the Eurosystem. However, ratherthan stipulating precisely how the institutionalfeatures of the Governing Council are to be
amended in view of a future large-scaleexpansion of the euro area, the FrenchPresidency launched the proposal to include
99Box 9Relevant provisions of the Treaty of NiceﬁProvisions relating to the operation of the Governing Council of the ECB in the Protocol on the Statute of the
European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank.Article 10 of the StatuteAddition of a new paragraph 610.6 The provisions of paragraph 2 [pertaining to voting procedures in the Governing Council] may beamended by the Council meeting in the composition of the Heads of State or Government, acting unanimouslyeither on a recommendation from the ECB and after consulting the European Parliament and the Commission,
or on a recommendation from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament and the ECB.The Council shall recommend such amendments to the Member States for adoption. The amendments shallenter into force after having been ratified by all the Member States in accordance with their respective
constitutional requirements.A recommendation made by the ECB under this paragraph shall require a decision by the Governing Councilacting unanimously.* * *Declaration to be included in the Final Act of the Conference on Article 10.6 of the Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank
The Conference expects that a recommendation within the meaning of Article 10.6 of the Statute of theEuropean System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank will be presented as soon as possible.ﬂin the Treaty a kind of ﬁenabling clauseﬂ whichwould allow for the future amendment ofspecific institutional features of the Governing
Council without there being a need toconvene a new full-scale IGC.Since the French Presidency™s proposal forsuch an enabling clause amounted to anﬁinstitutional change in the monetary areaﬂ
which, in accordance with Article 48 of theTreaty on European Union, requires the ECBto be formally consulted, the ECB delivered,
on 5 December 2000, an ECB Opinion at therequest of the Presidency of the Council ofthe European Union on a proposal to amend

Article 10.2 of the Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank (CON/00/30).Subsequently, the IGC agreed that, in legalterms, such an enabling clause should take
the form of a new paragraph 6 in the relevant
Article 10 (entitled ﬁThe Governing Councilﬂ)of the Statute of the ESCB. This newArticle 10.6 stipulates that a change to

Article 10.2 (pertaining to voting procedures
in the Governing Council) can be enactedwithout there being a need to convene a new
full-scale IGC. Significantly, it gives both the
Governing Council and the EuropeanCommission a right of initiative to launch
such a revision of Article 10.2 of the Statuteof the ESCB by means of a recommendation
(see also Box 9).The ECB regards the insertion of this enablingclause into the Statute of the ESCB as a useful
provision which permits a response to thechallenges of enlargement and the adaptationof the ECB™s decision-making structures in
order to guarantee the efficient conduct of astability-oriented monetary policy also in anenlarged euro area. At present, the need for
such an adjustment is not expected to arise
100in the near future. However, the GoverningCouncil will assess all options available andmake its recommendations as and when
appropriate.Other relevant Treaty changesThe IGC also agreed to extend decision-
making by QMV to four provisions in Title
VII of the Treaty (ﬁEconomic and Monetary
Policyﬂ). Specifically, QMV will be introduced
for decisions on external representation inthe context of EMU (Article 111.4). However,a declaration is added to the Treaty of Nice
which specifies that ﬁprocedures must be suchas to enable all the Member States in the
euro area to be fully involved in each stage of
preparing the position of the Community atinternational levelﬂ. QMV will also beintroduced for measures related to the
introduction of the euro (Article 123.4). Theconversion rate of national currencies to theeuro will, however, continue to bedetermined by means of a unanimous
decision. Furthermore, decisions on certain
emergency provisions relating to Communitymeasures and financial assistance in cases of
severe economic conditions or naturaldisasters (Articles 100.1 and 100.2) will inthe future also be taken by QMV. In this
context, a further declaration will be addedto the Treaty to state that any financial aid
granted under Article 100 is to be compatible

with the ﬁno bail-outﬂ rule (Article 103) andhas to respect the ceilings set for existing EUbudget lines.All changes to the Treaties will enter intoforce once the Treaty of Nice has been

ratified by all the Member States inaccordance with their respectiveconstitutional requirements.2International issues
2.1Institutional arrangements with
international organisationsThe Eurosystem continued to be involved ininternational co-operation on monetary,
economic and financial matters. The practical
arrangements adopted in 1998 and 1999for the international representation and
co-operation of the ECB, as described in the
Annual Report 1999, remained broadlyunchanged in 2000. With regard to therelations between the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) and the euro area, twodevelopments are worth noting.First, on 15 November 2000, the IMF
approved the ECB™s application to become aprescribed holder of Special Drawing Rights
(SDRs), the international reserve asset issuedby the IMF. The prescribed holder statusallows the ECB to exchange SDRs against
freely usable currencies (the US dollar, theeuro, the pound sterling and the Japaneseyen) in voluntary transactions with IMFmember countries and other prescribedholders. The ECB™s application was in linewith Article 30.5 of the Statute of the ESCB,
which stipulates that the ECB may hold andmanage SDRs.Second, on the occasion of the regular five-yearly review of the SDR valuation and
interest rate baskets on 1 January 2001, the
IMF decided to substitute a currency-basedapproach for the country-based approachCurrency29 December1 January
20002001
US dollar4545
euro2529
Japanese yen1815

pound sterling1211
Table 12Currency weights in the SDR valuationbasket(percentages)101applied until then for determining thecomposition of the SDR valuation and interest
rate baskets (see Box 10).2.2Multilateral and bilateral
surveillance of macroeconomicpoliciesRegular peer reviews (multilateralsurveillance) and reviews by independent
institutions Œ like the IMF or the OECD(bilateral surveillance) Œ of economic andfinancial developments and policies are
particularly important for the Eurosystem, asthey enhance the Eurosystem™s ability toanalyse the impact of external developments

on euro area variables. It should be noted,however, that the Eurosystem is not involved
in ex ante international co-ordination of its
monetary policy with the policies carried outby non-euro area countries. Such ex anteco-ordination could be incompatible with the
mandate of the Eurosystem Œ which is tomaintain price stability in the euro area Œ andwith its independence.Box 10Revision of the SDR valuation and interest rate baskets by the IMFThe exchange rate of the SDR is determined as a weighted average of the exchange rates of the most importantinternational currencies. Until the introduction of the euro, the currencies included in the SDR basket were theUS dollar, the Deutsche Mark, the French franc, the pound sterling and the Japanese yen. With the introductionof the euro on 1 January 1999, the Deutsche Mark and the French franc components were replaced by

equivalent amounts of euro. However, the criteria for selecting component currencies and assigning weightscontinued to be based on country indicators. Consequently, the weight of the euro component reflected onlythe economic weight of Germany and France.These criteria have now been adjusted to accommodate the existence of monetary unions such as the euro area.Hence the weight of the euro component in both the SDR valuation and interest rate baskets is now determinedon the basis of euro area-wide indicators, of which the exports of goods and services of the euro area Œexcluding internal trade Œ are the most important. The new weights of the components in the SDR valuation
basket are reported in Table 12.The IMF also reviewed its method for determining the SDR interest rate. The interest rate continues to bedetermined as the weighted average of interest rates on short-term (i.e. three-month) financial instrumentsdenominated in the currencies included in the SDR basket. In line with the shift to a currency-based SDRvaluation method, the three-month EURIBOR became the representative rate for the euro component, replacing
the national rates, namely the three-month interbank deposit rate in Germany and the rate on three-monthTreasury bills in France.Multilateral surveillanceThe ECB participated in the exchange of
information and views with other policy-makers in multilateral organisations and fora.
Regular meetings on economic and financialdevelopments and policies in major economicareas contributed to, inter alia, clarifying
views on the appropriateness of currentpolicies and on the impact of externaldevelopments on the euro area economy.In 2000, several international meetingsprovided an opportunity for such multilateral
exchanges of views. The President of the ECBtogether with the EU Presidency representedthe euro area in the sessions of the meetings
of G7 finance ministers and central bankgovernors devoted to surveillance andexchange rate issues. As illustrated by the
concerted intervention conducted on22 September 2000, the meetings of G7finance ministers and central bank governors

provide a framework for consultation onforeign exchange market developments thatmay lead to co-operation when appropriate.102The President of the ECB also participated in
the discussions on the state of the worldeconomy in a number of other informal fora,
such as the G10 and G20 meetings ofministers and governors.The ECB participated in the EPC of theOECD. The EPC discussed the short-term
global outlook and near-term policy
requirements, as well as policy issues relatedto growth, including the possible emergenceof a New Economy in OECD economies. The
subcommittees and working parties of theEPC, including Working Party No. 1, WorkingParty No. 3 and the Short-term Economic

Prospects Working Group, assisted the EPCin preparing these discussions.Bilateral surveillanceThe ECB not only contributed to multilateral
surveillance, but also participated in bilateralreviews of economic policies with the IMF
and the OECD. In 2000, the IMF held twoArticle IV consultations on the euro area™smonetary and exchange rate policies, which

supplemented the national consultations onother policies, such as fiscal and structuralpolicies. In discussing the report prepared
by the IMF staff, the IMF ExecutiveDirectors noted that strong macroeconomicfundamentals and favourable external
developments have resulted in robust growthin the euro area. They took the view that EMUhas strengthened the macroeconomic policy
framework of the euro area, not only throughthe conduct of the single monetary policy, butalso through better co-ordination of fiscal and
structural policies. The IMF Executive Boarddeemed the conduct of monetary policy sincethe introduction of the euro as appropriately
cautious. Finally, the Board highlighted the needfor continued structural reforms in labour and
product markets to create the conditions for
sustained non-inflationary growth.In April 2000 and November 2000, the IMFpublished the reports of the IMF staff on theeuro area Article IV consultations, togetherwith Public Information Notices (PINs)summarising the assessment of the IMF™s
Executive Board. These publications formedpart of a pilot project aimed at enhancing the
transparency of bilateral surveillance. Thispilot project has now been successfullyconcluded and the IMF has decided to
continue its policy of encouraging national
authorities to agree to the publication ofArticle IV reports and PINs.At the OECD, the ECB was involved inall discussions of the Economic and
Development Review Committee on reviewsof the economic situation in individual OECDmember countries. In addition to its country
reviews, the OECD decided to initiate a firstformal review of euro area-wide policies,which will be concluded in 2001. In
preparation for this review, an OECD missionvisited the ECB to conduct an assessment ofthe single monetary and exchange rate policy
and the overall economic situation in the euroarea.2.3Monitoring of developments in
global financial marketsThe ECB takes a particular interest in thework conducted in international organisations
and fora on international financial marketdevelopments.In 2000 the IMF continued to pay closeattention to financial market developments.As part of the preparatory work for the
publication of the yearly International Capital
Markets Report, an IMF delegation visited theECB to discuss recent developments in the
European financial markets, with a specialfocus on financial integration and policies toensure financial stability.
The ECB participated in the discussion amongfinance ministers and central bank governors

of the G10 countries on financial sector
consolidation. This discussion coveredpatterns, causes and implications of
consolidation for financial risks, monetary
policy, competition, payment systems andrelated policy issues.103Furthermore, the ECB took part in severalcommittees operating under the auspices ofthe central bank governors of the G10
countries. The Basel Committee on BankingSupervision (BCBS) focused its activity on anin-depth revision of the capital adequacy
framework (see Chapter VII). The ECBparticipated in the regular monitoring ofmarket developments by the Committee on
the Global Financial System (CGFS), aimed atidentifying potential sources of vulnerabilities
and assessing changes in the operational

infrastructure of financial markets. In thiscontext, the ECB contributed to improving
the banking statistics of the Bank for
International Settlements (BIS) as well as to
reports on electronic trading, on the use ofcollateral and on the determinants of market
liquidity. The ECB was also involved in thework of the Committee on Payment andSettlement Systems (CPSS), which has been

chaired by a member of the ECB™s Executive
Board since June 2000, and in that of theGold and Foreign Exchange Committee.Within the OECD, the ECB continued totake part in the examinations of structural

developments of global financial marketscarried out by the Financial MarketsCommittee.The Financial Stability Forum (FSF), which theECB attended as an observer, concentrated
on measures to enhance financial marketstability. In particular, the FSF defined apackage of measures to address concerns

about financial risks that may arise from the
activities of highly leveraged institutions
(HLIs). The proposed measures concentrate
on sound risk management practices bycounterparties of HLIs. More directregulatory measures on the HLIs themselves
were also considered, but not recommendedat this stage.In a report on offshore financial centres (OFCs),the FSF concluded that concerns about thetransparency and stability of some OFCs should
be addressed through the enhancedimplementation of internationally recognisedstandards and codes. The FSF released agrouping of OFCs into three categories basedon an assessment of their legal infrastructures
and supervisory practices, the level of co-
operation and the resources devoted tosupervision and co-operation. Following therecommendations of the FSF, the IMF launched
a programme to assess the compliance of OFCswith international standards and to providetechnical assistance to help OFCs implement
supervisory standards. Additional areas of workof the FSF include the identification of incentivesto implement international standards and codes
for countries in general, the development ofinternational guidance on deposit insuranceschemes and the implications of electronic

finance for supervision, regulation and marketfunctioning.2.4The architecture of the
international financial systemGiven that financial market stability is
essential to its statutory objectives, the

Eurosystem and, more generally, the ESCBtake a keen interest in the ongoing debate on
the risks to global financial stability that may

arise from disruptive developments ininternational financial markets. They were
therefore actively involved in developing
views on ways to strengthen the architectureof the international monetary and financialsystem, focusing on the promotion of sound

domestic economic policies and theimprovement of financial crisis management.Soundness of domestic economic policiesSound economic policies are a key requirementfor an orderly integration into the globaleconomic and financial system. Sound policies
extend beyond the traditional macroeconomicpolicy domain and encompass, in particular,prudent management of the risks associated
with external liabilities, a carefully conducted
liberalisation of capital movements and anappropriate exchange rate policy.In 2000, several international organisationsand fora analysed how the management of
104risks associated with external liabilities of thepublic and private sectors could be improved.The IMF, the FSF and the G20 formulated

and started implementing a number ofproposals to improve the monitoring andmanagement of these risks. With regard to
public sector liabilities, the IMF and theWorld Bank started developing guidelines onpublic debt management. Furthermore,
important progress was made in officialreserve management through theimplementation of the template on
international reserves and foreign currency
liquidity under the IMF™s Special Data
Dissemination Standard (SDDS). As part of

the implementation of this new template, theECB started releasing monthly data on theofficial reserves of the ECB and the
Eurosystem. The ECB also contributed to thework of the IMF on developing guidelineson the management of foreign exchange
reserves. With regard to private sector
liabilities, in particular those of financialinstitutions, countries should promote careful
risk management through appropriatesupervisory and regulatory regimes.International organisations and fora also
devoted specific attention to the orderlyliberalisation of the capital account. The
Eurosystem holds the view that capital
account liberalisation is inherently beneficial,provided that it is carefully designed and
sequenced in line with the developmentof a robust financial sector. In particular,liberalisation should start with the most stable
elements of capital flows, i.e. long-termflows such as foreign direct investment.
Furthermore, domestic financial systems
should be sufficiently strong beforerestrictions on capital flows are totally lifted.The Eurosystem also emphasises that, for
certain countries, regional economicintegration may provide an impetus to openthe capital account.The appropriateness of exchange rate regimeswas another main item on the agenda of

international meetings. The Eurosystemstresses that the choice of an exchangerate regime hinges on country-specificcharacteristics. A basic requirement for anappropriate exchange rate regime is itsconsistency with the overall policy
framework, as well as with the patterns ofregional trade and financial links. In addition,the assessment of a particular regime should

take into account the dynamic interactionbetween exchange rate policy and otherpolicy areas.The need to reduce the vulnerability ofindividual countries to crises through sound
domestic policies has led the IMF to reviewits surveillance activities. As a result, the IMFis increasingly focusing its surveillance on
monetary, fiscal, and exchange rate policies,along with their institutional foundations andclosely related structural reforms. Similarly,
surveillance increasingly takes into accountregional developments, as evidenced by theArticle IV consultations for the euro area.
The IMF is also intensifying its surveillance
over the soundness of the financial systems
in individual countries. In particular, the IMF
and the World Bank decided to continue theirjoint Financial Sector Assessment Program(FSAP) after successfully completing a pilot
project.In addition to more focused macroeconomicsurveillance, specific attention was paid tothe implementation of standards and codes.The FSF compiled a compendium of
12 internationally accepted standards andcodes that are relevant to sound and well-functioning financial systems. The IMF

continued to monitor compliance withinternational standards and codes by
preparing Reports on the Observance of

Standards and Codes (ROSCs) for a numberof member countries. In this context, theECB requested the IMF to prepare a
ROSC on the monetary policy and paymentsystems policy of the euro area. ThisROSC, which is to be finalised in 2001, will
contain an assessment of compliance with(i) transparency principles for monetarypolicy and payment systems oversight as set
out in the IMF™s Code of Good Practices onTransparency of Monetary and FinancialPolicies and (ii) the Core Principles for105Systemically Important Payment Systems,issued by the CPSS. The ROSC on the euroarea is to complement the ROSCs of
individual euro area countries, such as thoseof France and Ireland, which were completedin 2000 or early 2001.Management of financial crisesThe private sector is playing an increasinglyimportant role in the financing of emerging
market economies. In times of financialdistress, the public sector has often takenover this role, as private sector creditors are
generally only involved in the resolution offinancial crises on a case-by-case basis.Therefore, the IMF, the G7 and other

international organisations saw a need tocontinue work on general principles to
strengthen the framework for financial crisis

management. The IMF set up a CapitalMarkets Consultative Group to promote
regular dialogue with market participantsfrom the private sector. The IMF™s financingmechanisms were redesigned to make them
more effective in preventing and handling
crisis situations. In particular, there wasagreement on a number of changes to ensure
that countries do not rely on financialresources from the IMF for excessively longperiods or in excessively large amounts.The ESCB stresses the need for clear rules
that would set out the respective
responsibilities of the private and publicsectors in the resolution of crises. In view ofthe limited resources of the IMF and because
of moral hazard considerations, the role of
the IMF should focus on the mobilisation offinancial support and the formulation of

appropriate policy advice. In this vein, theESCB emphasises that public lending shouldbe limited and that private sector involvement
should be sought in all cases of internationalfinancial crises.3Bilateral issues
In 2000 the ECB continued to deepen its
working relations with many central banks
outside the EU. The ECB prepared policypositions on a number of issues which are ofrelevance to its co-operation with other

central banks. In particular, it establishedworking relations with central banks ofaccession countries, as well as those of other
neighbouring European countries, keyemerging market economies and selectedindustrialised countries.3.1Relations with accession countries
The Eurosystem intensified its dialogue withthe central banks of those countries which
are candidates for accession to the EU(ﬁaccession countriesﬂ), as the prospect ofthe accession of new Member States is a key

issue for the Eurosystem. Working relationswith accession countries™ central banks have
been strengthened through regular dialogueat both the policy and the technical level.Regular bilateral and multilateral co-operation

across a wide range of central banking areastook place in 2000. The Eurosystem alsomonitored economic and institutional
developments in these countries closely,specifically legislative discussions and
developments relating to the independence
of the central banks in these countries, where
it was able to provide support. The
Eurosystem analysed macroeconomic issues
and, in particular, exchange rate policystrategies pursued by accession countries. Inthis respect, the ECB contributed to the
discussions in the ECOFIN Council on the
framework for the exchange rate strategiesof accession countries and to the related
ECOFIN report to the European Council.Accession countries™ exchange rate regimescurrently vary from fixed pegs, the extremeform of which is a currency board, to freefloats. Until their entry into the EU, accession106countries are not subject to any specificTreaty requirements relating to exchange ratestrategies. Fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria
should be the focus of accession countries™policies at this stage and the setting-up ofan appropriate microeconomic foundation
for a competitive market economy is ofkey importance to achieving sustainablemacroeconomic stabilisation. The large
variety of exchange rate arrangements mightseem appropriate to the specific demands ofthe transition process, taking into account
progress on structural reform as well as theimplications of individual policy choices.However, although such diversity may be
warranted before EU membership, potentialnew EU members foreseeing joining the newexchange rate mechanism (ERM II) may
already wish to consider the suitability oftheir current policies with a view to theirprospective membership of this mechanism.
When acceding to the EU, accessioncountries will become ﬁMember States with
a derogationﬂ and will be required to treattheir exchange rate policy as a matter ofcommon concern. This means that Member

States shall refrain from pursuing exchangerate policies that hamper the smoothfunctioning of the Single Market. They will be

expected to join ERM II, since new MemberStates will not have an ﬁopt-outﬂ clauseconcerning the EMU chapter and will
ultimately adopt the euro. ERM II can bejoined at any time following accession, inaccordance with the procedures set out in
the relevant Council Resolution.ERM II is sufficiently flexible to accommodate
the exchange rate regimes currently pursuedin the majority of the accession countries.The Eurosystem examined the compatibility
of different exchange rate regimes with the
requirements for participation in ERM II.Exchange rate regimes based on a peg or a
managed float using the euro as the referencecurrency can in principle be accommodated,whereas this would obviously not be the case
for a regime based on a freely floatingexchange rate. In addition, crawling pegs andexchange rate regimes based on referencecurrencies other than the euro are, in theview of the Eurosystem, incompatible withthe ERM II framework.The Eurosystem also examined whether euro-
based currency board arrangements (CBAs)
can be maintained while participating inERM II. The Eurosystem is of the view that
such arrangements cannot be regarded as a

substitute for participation in ERM II, but may,under some circumstances, constitute aunilateral commitment enhancing compliance

with the requirement under ERM II tomaintain exchange rate stability. Accessioncountries which have operated a sustainable

euro-based CBA would not be required togo through a double regime shift to adoptthe euro. The sustainability of euro-based
CBAs will be assessed on a case-by-case basis.The unilateral commitment derived from aeuro-based CBA will not impose any
additional obligations on the ECB to thosederiving from the relevant CouncilResolution. Moreover, participation in ERM II

while maintaining a euro-based CBA wouldnot exempt the relevant parties fromcommonly defining a central rate against the
euro.In some accession countries, as an alternativepath to adopting the single currency,i.e. outside the framework of the Treaty, the
idea of adopting the euro as legal tender, or
ﬁeuroisationﬂ, has been raised. TheEurosystem, however, does not considereuroisation to be an acceptable way for an
accession country to adopt the euro.Accession countries are on a predefined pathto entry into the EU and ultimately into the
euro area, which implies that they must followthe procedures and comply with therequirements laid down in the Treaty.

Euroisation by an accession country wouldconflict with the economic reasoning behindEMU, which foresees the eventual adoption
of the euro as the end of a convergenceprocess within a multilateral framework. Thisapproach is, in itself, a reflection of the

consensus view that a successful monetaryunion requires prior macroeconomicconvergence between the participating107Member States and common agreements onkey issues, such as the eventual adoption ofthe irrevocably fixed conversion rate.In 2000 the ECB stepped up its co-operationwith the central banks of accession countries.
These activities took the form of multilateralseminars, bilateral visits at the expert level,high-level consultations, internships, the

provision of technical assistance and regularprofessional working relations at the expert
level. About 60 activities were organised in
2000, involving central banks from all theaccession countries (see Chart 21). Thecentral bank co-operation addressed a large
number of issues related to economicanalysis, legal systems, payment and securitiessettlement systems, the monetary policy
framework, the exchange rate policyframework, statistics, accounting, internalaudit, banknotes and prudential supervision.
In the legal field, the Eurosystem, inco-operation with the central banks of theaccession countries, conducted a detailedChart 21Co-operation activities between the ECBand the central banks of accessioncountriesexamination of the status of legislation in thecentral banking and financial market areas.
Such co-operation activities serve as an
important means of promoting an orderlyintegration of the central banks of accessioncountries into the ESCB and ultimately into
the Eurosystem.To meet the increasing demand for
co-operation in a co-ordinated way, the ECB
and the national central banks of the euroarea have started to elaborate a framework
for their co-operation activities. As part ofthis framework, they have started sharing
information on their co-operation activities
with accession countries™ central banks and
will continue to do so on a regular basis. The
main objectives of the framework are to
mobilise all available resources, to benefitfrom the experience of the differentcomponents of the Eurosystem, to ensure
the necessary support for the central banksof all accession countries and to make surethat consistent approaches and strategies are
followed.Central bank co-operation between theEurosystem and accession countries™ central
banks also takes the form of high-levelseminars. The Vienna Seminar organised
by the ECB and the OesterreichischeNationalbank on 15 December 2000 was thesecond high-level seminar to bring together
the Eurosystem and the governors of thecentral banks of the 12 EU accessioncountries (Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia). It followed the Helsinki Seminar,
the first seminar which was held at the levelof the governors.The purpose of the Vienna Seminar was tohold a more in-depth discussion of importantmonetary policy issues to ensure the smooth
future integration of accession countries™central banks into the ESCB and, ultimately,the Eurosystem. After the 1999 Helsinki
Seminar had set out the general policy
framework, the discussion in December 2000focused on three specific issues: price01020304050010203040500102030405001020304050Visits at expertlevelInternshipsTechnical
assistanceTrainingcourses,workshopsHigh-levelconsultationsLegalEconomic
analysisPaymentsystemsStatisticsMonetary
policyframeworkForeignexchangepolicyframeworkOtherForms of co-operation(as a percentage of all co-operation activities)Areas of co-operation(as a percentage of all co-operation activities)108Box 11Main conclusions emerging from the Vienna SeminarAccession countries will need to further advance the process of bringing down inflation rates in the years tocome, while not delaying the much-needed relative price adjustments within the economy. Such price
adjustments are part of the process of transition and ﬁreal convergence
ﬂ (catching up) and will typically
entail inflation rates that will, for some time, range above those prevailing in the euro area, and graduallyapproach them.Nominal and real convergence should be pursued in parallel. Progress in nominal and real convergence will
imply an orderly closing of the gap between the accession countries and the euro area economy, both interms of per capita income and price levels. In this process, monetary policy needs to be supported byprudent fiscal and wage policies and adequate structural reforms.No common prescription is appropriate for monetary policy strategies and for exchange rate policies before

EU accession. Different regimes are feasible, as long as they are supported by an appropriate and stability-

oriented economic policy stance.The strict implementation of EU Treaty obligations in accession countries, in particular those concerning
the independent status of the central bank, will be of fundamental importance for the integration of theaccession countries into the European Union and, eventually, into the euro area.Entry into the euro area will be based upon fulfilment of the convergence criteria. The Treaty establishing
the European Community requires strict and sustainable fulfilment of these criteria, which will be appliedto future euro area entrants in the same way as they have been in the past.The ongoing dialogue between the Eurosystem and accession countries™ central banks will be further
expanded. In particular, the Eurosystem stands ready to enhance its central bank co-operation activities in
all relevant areas, including economic and monetary policy analysis, payment systems, statistics, legalissues and other areas.dynamics in accession countries, the role ofcentral banks in the accession process andco-operation between the Eurosystem and
the accession countries™ central banks.Similar events will continue to be held in theyears to come. The next seminar will takeplace in Berlin in 2001.3.2Relations with other countries
The ECB also developed its relations with
the central banks of European countries thatare not in the accession process, key
emerging market economies and selectedindustrialised countries. The President and
the other members of the Executive Boardvisited a number of third countries andreceived delegations from these countries.Attention was paid to third countries on or
near the European continent. In somecountries of south-eastern Europe and of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),the euro has replaced the euro area national
currencies as a reference currency in
exchange rate policies. The authorities ofMontenegro informed the ECB that the eurowould be the sole legal tender in their
territory from 13 November 2000 and thatall cash holdings in Yugoslav dinars would beconverted into Deutsche Mark until the
introduction of euro banknotes and coins.The decision to introduce the euro was taken
unilaterally without involvement of the ECB.109The ECB also participated in meetings ofregional networks and fora on or near theEuropean continent. In particular, the ECB
attended the annual meeting of the CentralBank Governors™ Club in Ankara, an informalgrouping that includes central banks of
countries in the Balkans, the Black Sea regionand the Caucasus. In addition, the ECB tookpart in the Working Table on Economic

Reconstruction, Development andCo-operation within the framework of theStability Pact for south-eastern Europe.Clinica Pediatrica Ospedale ÒS.GerardoÓ,Italy
Designed by Pedrotti Riccardo and Francesca Zavanone.Untitled
Chapter VIPayment and securitiessettlement systems1121General issues/introduction
Statement on the role of theEurosystem in the field of
payment systems oversightIn its statement of June 2000, the GoverningCouncil explained that promoting the smoothfunctioning of payment systems is a core

function of central banks and is directly linkedto its responsibilities for monetary policy andfinancial stability. Sound and efficient payment

and settlement systems are essential for thesmooth implementation of monetary policyand contribute towards the stability of the

financial system as well as to publicconfidence in the euro. In order to achieve
these objectives, the Eurosystem carefully
monitors developments in the field ofpayment and settlement systems, offerspayment and settlement services directly and
ensures compliance with relevant standardsfor systems operated by itself as well as bythe private sector. This oversight role of the
Eurosystem Œ which covers both large-valueinterbank funds transfer systems and retailpayment systems Œ is recognised in the
Treaty establishing the European Community(Article 105 (2)) and the Statute of the ESCB(Articles 3 and 22).The Governing Council formulates thecommon oversight policy stance by
determining the objectives and setting thestandards with which payment systems have
to comply. In areas not specifically covered

by the common oversight policy, policies
defined at the NCB level apply withinthe framework of the common policy.
Enforcement of the common oversight policystance is ensured by the NCBs in relation topayment systems legally incorporated in their
jurisdiction. However, in view of the specialcharacteristics of some systems, theGoverning Council can entrust the ECB with
the oversight responsibility for such systems.The common oversight policy stance can beensured by ECB legal acts in accordance with

Article 22 of the Statute of the ESCB ormore informal tools (e.g. moral suasion). Anappropriate co-ordination and reportingframework ensures consistency in theimplementation of oversight policies.The Eurosystem™s oversight policy is based in
particular on the principles for theminimisation of systemic risk set out in the
1993 Report of the Committee of Governors

of the Central Banks of the Member States ofthe European Economic Community entitledﬁMinimum common features for domestic

payment systemsﬂ. In the context of the
preparations for EMU, this report confirmed
the safety standards set out in the 1990
ﬁReport of the Committee on InterbankNetting Schemes of the Central Banks of the
Group of Ten countriesﬂ (Lamfalussy report).
In 2000 further work was carried out witha view to providing guidance on theimplementation of Standard I of the
Lamfalussy report (which requires paymentsystems to have a well-founded legal basis)
by requiring legal opinions for foreign
participants in euro large-value payment
systems. The guiding principles of theEurosystem™s oversight policy in the field of
electronic money are the requirements setout in the ECB™s ﬁReport on electronic
moneyﬂ of 1998.Since the beginning of this year, the ﬁCoreprinciples for systemically important payment
systemsﬂ, as approved by the G10 Governorsin January 2001, have also formed part of thestandards applied by the Eurosystem when

performing its oversight role.Memorandum of Understanding
Since close co-operation between paymentsystems overseers and banking supervisorscontributes to an overall strategy of riskreduction in the financial system, and is thus
essential, the ECB and the NCBs of theEurosystem and of the non-participatingMember States, in their capacity as overseers
of payment systems, and the EU banking
supervisory authorities have agreed toa ﬁMemorandum of Understandingﬂ (the113Memorandum). The Memorandum replaces a
previous arrangement in place since 1994and takes into consideration both the
new institutional environment created bythe establishment of the Eurosystem andthe Eurosystem™s oversight framework. It

focuses on an exchange of informationbetween payment systems overseers andbanking supervisors in relation to large-value
interbank funds transfer systems (IFTSs), inorder to ensure the soundness and stabilityof such systems and of their participants
(credit institutions and investment firms). The
Memorandum may also serve as a starting-point for organising co-operation on retail
payment systems, including electronic moneyschemes (see also Chapter VII, Section 1).Co-operation with accession countriesThe ECB participates in multilateralco-operation with accession countries in thefield of payment and settlement systems. In 2000the ECB focused on key reforms of payment
and settlement systems under way in thesecountries and on an exchange of views onpayment issues related to the accession process.
In this connection, the ECB hosted a majortwo-day seminar entitled ﬁPayment andsettlement systems and the accession processﬂ
in mid-February 2000, which was attended byrepresentatives of the European Commission
and the central banks of the Member States
and of 12 accession countries. Furthermore,bilateral contacts and working relationshipswere established and maintained throughout the
year. Closer co-operation with accession
countries is planned for 2001. More detailed
information on the ECB™s relations with

accession countries is provided in Chapter V.2Oversight of large-value payment systems
Developments in large-value payment
systems in euroIn 2000 the five large-value payment systemsthat process payments in euro alongsideTARGET continued to operate smoothly.These systems are the Euro Clearing System
(Euro 1), which is run by the Clearing
Company of the Euro Banking Association(EBA), and four domestic systems: Euro
Access Frankfurt (EAF) in Germany, Paris Net
Settlement (PNS) in France, Servicio de PagosInterbancarios (SPI) in Spain and Pankkien
On-line Pikasiirrot ja Sekit-järjestelmä (POPS)in Finland.The ECB continues to play its three-fold role
in respect of Euro 1. Besides its oversightrole, which includes monitoring general

developments in the system, the ECBprovides end-of-day settlement services. In
addition, the ECB holds the liquidity pool for
Euro 1, which has been established in orderto ensure the timely settlement of Euro 1 inthe event of a failure of participants. Somefluctuation in the membership of Euro 1
occurred in 2000, owing to the withdrawal ofsome participants, mainly as a consequenceof mergers between banks and new members
joining. Overall, the number of participantsremained stable at 72 (as at the end of
December 2000).Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS)The CLS Bank (CLSB), established in NewYork, has confirmed that it intends to settle
foreign exchange transactions on a payment-versus-payment basis as from October
2001. As foreseen by the framework for
co-operative oversight set up by theLamfalussy report, the Federal ReserveSystem has the lead oversight responsibility
for the CLS system and has involved the
central banks of the other eligible currenciesin the oversight of the system design. It is
envisaged that the Bank of England will bethe designating authority under the EuropeanParliament and Council Directive 98/26/EC
114of 19 May 1998 on settlement finality inpayment and securities settlement systems.
Since the euro will be one of the currencies
to be settled under the scheme from thestart, the Eurosystem has closely followedthe development of the system and has liaised

closely with the other relevant overseers andCLSB itself. An account for CLSB will soonbe opened in the ECB payment mechanism
(EPM) for testing purposes and, subject tofinal approval of the system, the ECB willopen an account for CLSB for live operations.In 2000 and in early 2001, representatives ofthe Eurosystem met with the euro area
shareholders of CLS Services, the holding
company which is managing the project, todiscuss risk management, liquidity and
operational issues relating to the settlementof the euro leg of foreign exchangetransactions. The meetings focused on the
impact of CLSB™s operations on euro area
large-value payment systems and on liquiditymanagement issues in euro.Developments in the correspondentbanking business in euro
The Eurosystem has an interest in followingdevelopments not only in large-value and retailpayment systems in euro, but also in the
payment business as a whole. To this end, the

Eurosystem, in co-operation with the centralbanks of non-participating Member States,carried out a survey-based study of the recentevolution in correspondent banking in the EU.It provided evidence that EMU, together with
its new payment system infrastructure, new
payment systems initiatives (e.g. in the field of
retail payments and CLS), technologicalinnovation and financial sector consolidation

have been sources of major changes in the way
correspondent banking activities are nowcarried out. All these factors have led to an
ongoing concentration of correspondentbanking business among a limited number ofmarket players. Some banks have become the

settlement institutions for a large group of banksor run innovative payment arrangements thatcombine the features of correspondent banking
and fund transfer systems. In some cases, thescale of the payment activities of those marketplayers exceeds the turnover of the smaller
euro large-value payment systems mentionedabove. A further step towards higherconcentration is expected to occur in 2002,
after the introduction of the euro banknotesand coins, since the correspondent bankingrelations that currently exist in respect of
payments in legacy currencies will no longer beneeded.These trends have an impact on efficiency,competition and risk in the payment business,all of which the Eurosystem considers from
an oversight perspective. As banks are themain players in this field, analysis ofdevelopments and of their implications is
carried out in co-operation with nationalbanking supervisory authorities.3Oversight of retail payment systems
Cross-border retail servicesIn 2000, the Eurosystem continued toorganise regular meetings with banks,payment systems operators and the European
Credit Sector Associations in order toencourage discussions and facilitateco-operation aimed at the timely fulfilment of
the objectives set out in the report entitledﬁImproving cross-border retail paymentservices Œ the Eurosystem™s viewﬂ (September1999). In this context, a Progress Report waspublished in September 2000 which describes
the progress made by the banking andpayment systems industry since thepublication of the 1999 report. Furthermore,
it provides an interim assessment up to theend of August 2000 against the objectivesand identifies the outstanding issues. The
Progress Report indicates that the bankingand payment systems industry has committeditself to the fulfilment of the Eurosystem115objectives. Progress has been made towardspreparing the ground for a more efficienthandling of cross-border retail credit
transfers. In this respect, standards allowingstraight-through processing (STP) of paymentorders have been introduced, the EBA has
established a payment system for cross-border low-value payments (Step 1, seebelow) and substantial progress to reduce
balance of payment reporting requirementsas from 2002 has been achieved.Nevertheless, the Eurosystem has also
identified some unresolved issues. It is urgingthe banks and payment systems to commitpublicly to an early implementation date for

the STP standards. In addition, more progressis expected with regard to customer pricesand the elimination of charges for the payee,
if the payer has asked to bear all costs. TheEuropean Credit Sector Associations arecurrently developing solutions to the
problem. The Eurosystem recognises that
achieving the objectives not only depends on
banks but also on companies and customers,
who should include sufficient information oninvoices and payment orders to permit STP.The Eurosystem has therefore invited the
banking and payment systems industry tolaunch an information campaign.The Eurosystem will continue to monitorclosely the activities of the banking sectorand the progress made towards the fulfilment
of the objectives, in order to ensure that thepreparations ultimately translate intoadequate services for European citizens.

Further meetings and workshops bringingtogether the Eurosystem and marketrepresentatives are planned.Step 1 initiative by the EBAIn response to the Eurosystem™s objectivesfor cross-border retail payment services, the
EBA  developed a cross-border retail payment
service which uses the existing technicalplatform of its Euro 1 large-value system.

This service is called ﬁSTEP 1ﬂ (derived fromﬁStraight-Through Euro Processingﬂ) and waslaunched on 20 November 2000. A bankwhich has joined the STEP 1 arrangement isable to submit retail payments to, and receivethem from, other STEP 1 participants and
settle the netted balances via a bank that isparticipating in the Euro 1 large-value system(settlement bank). To date, 21 banks have

joined the STEP 1 initiative. STEP 1 issupposed to be the nucleus for furtherdevelopments of the EBA in the area of cross-

border retail payment systems.
The ECB has assessed STEP 1 from a paymentsystems oversight perspective. Theassessment of STEP 1 has not focused onSTEP 1 itself, but rather on the impact it may
have on the soundness and smoothfunctioning of Euro 1 and on a Euro 1 bank
which is acting as a settlement bank for

STEP 1 banks. Against this background, theGoverning Council of the ECB confirmed itsnon-objection to the launch of STEP 1. The
ECB will continue to follow the further
development of STEP I. It will only be possibleto evaluate the full extent of STEP 1™s

contribution to the achievement of theEurosystem™s objectives for cross-borderretail payment services once it has been
operating live for some time.Electronic moneyThe Eurosystem continually followsdevelopments in electronic money and itsimplications for central banks. In 2000 itco-operated actively with the European
Community institutions on the newregulatory framework for electronic money
institutions (ELMIs), a process which led to

the publication on 27 October 2000 of theEuropean Parliament and Council Directive
No. 2000/46/EC on the taking-up, pursuit
and prudential supervision of the businessof electronic money institutions andEuropean Parliament and Council Directive

No. 2000/28/EC amending Directive
No. 2000/12/EC relating to the taking-up andpursuit of the business of credit institutions.

This new regulatory framework largelyanswers the monetary policy, prudential and
payment systems concerns of the ECB.116Particular attention was also paid to thetechnical security approaches to electronic
money schemes and their interoperability within
the euro area. The Eurosystem is studyingdifferent approaches adopted by electronicmoney schemes and market initiatives in this
area, as it considers these factors important forthe reliable functioning of systems and forprotection against criminal abuse.Preparation of retail systems in euro for
the 2002 cash changeoverIn 2000 the ECB and the euro area NCBs
started to collect information on the stateof preparations for the final changeover tothe euro on 1 January 2002, also in relationto the Commission Recommendation of
11 October 2000 on measures to facilitate

the preparation of economic operators forthe changeover to the euro. Within the fieldof payment and settlement systems the focus
is on the preparation both of retail payment
systems, such as automated clearing houses(ACHs), point of sale (POS) networks and
electronic money schemes, and of retail
payment instruments. The informationobtained so far does not indicate any
insurmountable problems. The ECB and theNCBs will continue to monitor developmentsclosely throughout 2001.4Other payment systems activities
In February 2000, the ECB published adocument entitled ﬁPayment systems in theEuropean Union: Addendum incorporating
1998 figuresﬂ, a statistical update of the 1996
report entitled ﬁPayment systems in theEuropean Unionﬂ (the ﬁBlue Bookﬂ). In view
of the fundamental changes that have taken
place since 1996, the ECB, in closeco-operation with the NCBs, has beenworking on a new, third edition of the BlueBook to be published in the second quarter
of 2001. It will provide an updated andrestructured descriptive guide to the paymentand securities settlement systems operating
in the euro area and the EU Member States,and include statistics for 1999.5Securities settlement systems policy
The Eurosystem has a general interest in the
smooth functioning of securities settlementsystems (SSSs). The Eurosystem™s interest

stems from several concerns.
First, according to the Statute of theESCB, central bank credit for monetarypolicy or payment systems is granted only on
the basis of adequate collateral. As most

collateral transfers occur via SSSs, theirappropriate functioning is a condition forthe smooth implementation of monetary
policy operations.Second, SSSs and payment systems are closely
linked. Should SSSs be subject to sudden
disruptions, the liquidity arising fromsecurities transactions may not be availableto the market and could result in liquidity
shortages, which, in turn, could trigger asystemic disruption within large-value
payment systems.The Eurosystem™s attention extends tosecurities clearing organisations, since they
are increasingly performing certain functionstraditionally performed by SSSs, such as the
matching and netting of settlementinstructions.Assessment of securities settlementsystemsIn 1998, in its capacity as a user of SSSs, theEurosystem set standards for the use of EU117SSSs in its credit operations and assessed theEU SSSs against these standards. The resultsof the assessment, and in particular the list of

eligible SSSs and their conditions of use, are
published on the ECB™s website.The Eurosystem completed a secondassessment in 1999 and carried out a thirdassessment in 2000 to update the list of
eligible SSSs and their conditions of use whichwas published in February 2001. The SSSshave maintained their efforts during 2000 to
enhance their level of compliance with thestandards. As a result there are now eight
SSSs in the EU that can be used without
preconditions. In addition to the changes tocomply further with the standards, theEuropean SSSs industry is subject to a strong

consolidation process at both a national anda cross-border level. In this respect, four SSSs(CBISSO in Ireland, CGO in the United
Kingdom, LDT and CAT in Italy) have been
removed from the list of eligible SSSs. OtherSSSs have announced and agreed to merge
(e.g. Deutsche Börse Clearing and Cedel,forming Clearstream, and Euroclear withSicovam SA, Necigef and CIK). However,
consolidation has led to an integration oftechnical and operational platforms ratherthan towards a formal reduction of the

number of SSSs.Assessment of linksThe Eurosystem has also continued to assesslinks between SSSs, in line with its policy ofencouraging the development of market
solutions for the cross-border use of
collateral and to foster the integration ofEuropean financial markets. The links thathave been assessed so far allow the cross-
border transfer of securities on a free-of-
payment basis.In 1999 the Eurosystem assessed and deemed
eligible a total of 47 links. The Eurosystemcontinued the exercise in February, May and
October 2000, which in the end resulted in atotal of 64 eligible links.
However, following the withdrawal ofCBISSO, CGO, LDT and CAT from the listof the eligible SSSs, the total number of

eligible links had decreased to 62 by the endof December 2000 (an up-to-date list ofeligible links can be found on the ECB™s
website).Integration of the European securitiesmarketThe Eurosystem has a keen interest in the
integration of the securities market and istherefore analysing aspects of the market

infrastructure that are determinants in thisprocess. In this respect, the following barriersto the development of an integrated European
financial market have been identified in closecontact with market participants and will need
to be addressed:insufficient development of procedures for
cross-border settlement on a DVP basis;multiplicity of master agreements aslegal documentation for collateralisedoperations such as repos (the Eurosystem
has been associated with and has
participated in discussions towardsdeveloping a harmonised legal framework
in the field of collateralised operations);lack of harmonisation in SSS procedures
and in the collateralisation processes;
heterogeneity of legal, regulatory and fiscalregimes.Mitarbeiterkinder der Luxair S.A.,Luxembourg
Designed by Paule Lemmer.Title:Tracing the EURO
Chapter VIIFinancial stability andprudential supervision1201Developments in the institutional framework for financial
stabilityThe increasing integration of banking andfinancial activities in the euro area and theEU led the EU authorities, in the course of
2000, to review the institutional arrangementsand the regulatory framework for financialstability in place. Two issues arose. The first
was the capacity of the present institutionalarrangements to accommodate changes infinancial markets and to provide sufficient
safeguards of financial stability. The secondwas whether the regulatory framework mightlag behind financial market developments,
hence creating obstacles to the process ofmarket integration. Both issues were tackledby ad hoc groups: the Working Group on
Financial Stability, set up by the Economicand Financial Committee (EFC), and theCommittee of Wise Men on the regulation
of European securities markets, establishedby the EU Council meeting in the compositionof ministers of finance and economy
(ECOFIN). The ECB followed these initiativesclosely in view of its keen interest in the
euro area and the EU having an institutional
and regulatory framework that is both
effective in ensuring financial stability andconducive to more integrated financial
markets.The ﬁReport on financial stabilityﬂ1 of the
EFC Working Group concludes that the
existing institutional arrangements provide acoherent and flexible basis for safeguarding
financial stability in increasingly integratedmarkets, but that their operationalfunctioning needs some enhancement. In
particular, the report puts forward fourrecommendations for adapting the practicalarrangements to the prevailing trends in the
financial sector: (i) strengthening cross-
sectoral co-operation at the EU level between
banking, securities and insurance supervisors,
inter alia by clarifying and extending theconcept of a co-ordinating supervisor forlarge financial groups, (ii) enhancing exchanges
of information both between differentsupervisory authorities and betweensupervisory authorities and central banks onmajor financial institutions and market trends,(iii) reinforcing the co-operation betweensupervisors and central banks in order to

tackle potential financial problems with cross-border implications, and (iv) working onconvergence in supervisory practices.The ECB supports the stance taken in the
report.  Given the current trends in financial

markets as well as the fact that prudentialsupervision remains a national responsibilitythe smooth co-operation among supervisors
is needed to facilitate preventive andcorrective action to maintain the stability ofthe financial system in the euro area and the

EU.The EFC has sent the ﬁReport on financialstabilityﬂ to all relevant EU committees,together with a request to take formalmeasures to implement the recommendations
and to report on all progress. The mainbodies involved in the field of banking
supervision are the ESCB™s Banking
Supervision Committee (BSC), the BankingAdvisory Committee (BAC) and the Groupede Contact (GdC). In all these fora,
work is under way to implement therecommendations and step up multilateralco-operation. Particular emphasis is placed on
convergence in supervisory practices, whichis the most innovative and challenging areaof work. The GdC, which has already been
operating as a forum for co-operation onsupervisory practices for a long time, is veryactive in this field. The BSC™s contribution to

this process is focused, in particular, on thosesupervisory arrangements having a bearing
on systemic stability and on those aspects
calling for co-operation between theEurosystem/ESCB and banking supervisors.In the latter context, a Memorandum ofUnderstanding has been agreed upon by the
EU payment systems overseers (including the1Published on 8 April 2000.
121ECB) and the EU banking supervisors forco-operation and the exchange of information(see also Chapter VI of this Annual Report).
The agreement replaces a previous
arrangement in place since 1994. The EUbanking supervisors contributed to the
preparation of the Memorandum through theBSC. The new framework Œ which is neededsince payment system oversight and
prudential supervision share the commonobjective of ensuring financial stability Œ isintended to cope with the change in the
way the two functions now interact, triggeredby the establishment of EMU. TheMemorandum addresses co-operation and the
exchange of information in three different
sets of circumstances: (i) the establishment
of a payment system and applications for

access to such system, (ii) on-going activities,and (iii) crisis management situations.Significant steps forward were also taken inthe field of cross-sectoral co-operation between
supervisors, in particular through the setting-
up of the Cross-Sector Roundtable ofRegulators. All the relevant EU committeesparticipate in the Roundtable
2 and the
European Commission facilitates the process.This informal forum allows for a morein-depth exchange of information betweenthe different sectoral groups of supervisors
on matters of common interest.
The Eurosystem also has a general interest inthe move towards more integrated securitiesmarkets. The tasks of the Eurosystem topromote the smooth functioning of payment
systems and to contribute to the smoothconduct of national policies in the field of
prudential supervision and financial stability
give the ECB an even stronger incentive tomonitor and assess relevant developments insecurities market infrastructures and the

regulatory framework. Consequently, theECB actively participated in the consultationprocess initiated by the Committee of Wise
Men on the regulation of European securitiesmarkets. The Committee has been mandatedby ECOFIN to assess the current conditions

of the regulation of securities markets and to
make proposals in order to eliminate existingobstacles to the integration of financial
markets. The proposals put forward by theCommittee for achieving a more flexible andeffective regulatory process at the EU level
are broadly supported by the ECB.2Developments in the banking sector
The integration of banking and financial
markets in the euro area proceeded furtherin 2000, significantly increasing the relevanceof cross-border wholesale activities and the
foreign components of securities portfolios,while lending and deposit-taking maintain asignificant degree of segmentation into national
or even regional markets. In December 200085% of bank deposits and 90% of bank loans(excluding interbank transactions) consisted of
business with dom
estic counterparties (seeTable 1). However, the picture is rather different
when interbank transactions are taken into
consideration. The share of cross-borderinterbank transactions within the euro area hasincreased steadily, stimulated by the single
currency and the single monetary policy,
accounting for more than 50% of overall gross
transactions in both unsecured and repointerbank market. Loans towards bankinginstitutions resident in other euro areacountries increased from 16.6% in December1998 to 17.6% (December 2000) of total
interbank loans, whereas the proportion ofother claims, including fixed income securitiesand money market paper, vis-à-vis other euro
area countries increased from 14.5% to19.8% in the same period. The trendtowards international diversification is also
apparent from the composition of the
securities portfolios of euro area banks. Theshare of fixed income instruments issued by2The participating committees are the BSC, the BAC, the GdC,
the High Level Securities Supervisors Committee (HLSS), the
Forum of European Securities Commissions (FESCO), the
Insurance Committee (IC) and the Insurance Conference.122other euro countries and the rest of theworld has increased steadily since 1998.The analysis of balance sheet data, however,does not give a complete account of thecross-border activities of banks, since these
data do not reflect some services which haveexperienced particularly high growth in the
recent past. This is the case, for instance, for
fee-generating activities, such as corporatefinance and asset management services.In the face of the increasing linkages between
banks and the common trends affecting theirbusiness, the activity of the BSC Œ in the
context of the Eurosystem™s task tocontribute to the smooth conduct of
supervisory and financial stability policies Œ
has been further developed along two mainlines.First, the analytical tools for themacroprudential analysis of the banking sectorhave been sharpened by proposing a
comprehensive framework for monitoring thesystemic risk associated with the bankingsector from an EU and euro area-wide
perspective. In particular, this framework,based on the combination of statisticalinformation and a qualitative and, to the
extent possible, forward-looking assessmentby the national supervisory authorities, isintended to identify and examine on a
systematic basis any events or developmentswhich could threaten the stability of the
banking sector. Significant progress has been
made on enhancing the information base usedfor this analysis, which includes both central
bank and supervisory data. A set of ﬁmacro-

prudential indicatorsﬂ has been identified and
ways to further enhance the informationcontinue to be explored.A first assessment
 of the EU banking sector
stability was carried out by the BSC in the

course of 2000 and will be regularly updatedin the future. The regular monitoring ofsystemic stability in the EU and euro area
also allows specific issues to be identified forfurther analysis. During the first monitoringexercises, particular attention was devotedto the analysis of the effects of asset pricemovements on the EU banking sector3 and of
EU banks™ interest margins and credit

standards.4 With regard to the latter, the
main finding was that a narrowing in banks™lending margins has taken place in recent
years (between September 1997 andSeptember 2000), which has been largelyattributed to the ongoing tightening of
competition. In particular, cross-bordercompetition intensified in some areas, withthe Nordic countries and the UK and Irish
markets being clear examples of integratingregional financial markets, while the growthof ﬁremote bankingﬂ supported increased
competitive pressures from new entrants. In
order to ensure that the lower lendingmargins are sustainable, banks should adopt
sound provisioning policies and riskmanagement systems, effective cost controlsand adequate asset quality and capital. With
regard to banks™ lending standards, the overallassessment by supervisory authorities isbroadly satisfactory, although there is
evidence that banks™ internal rating systemsare often based heavily on current economicconditions rather than on developments in
asset quality over the business cycle.However, there are already some examples
of banks moving towards a more long term-

oriented approach in which loan qualitythroughout the economic cycle is evaluated.Second, the BSC enhanced its 
analysis of majorstructural developments within the EU banking
systems. This activity has proven to be a

valuable contribution to the work of thenational supervisory authorities, in terms ofidentifying issues of concern and areas where
closer monitoring and/or an adaptation ofsupervisory practices is needed. Following upon earlier work on the possible effects of
EMU and technology on the EU bankingsystems and on the income structure ofthe EU banks,5 work in the year 2000
3See the report entitled ﬁAsset prices and banking stabilityﬂ,
published by the ECB in April 2000.4See the report entitled ﬁEU banks™ margins and credit standardsﬂ,
published by the ECB in December 2000.5See the ECB™s Annual Reports for 1998 and 1999.
123EUR billions unless stated otherwiseDec. 1997Dec. 1998Dec. 1999Dec. 2000
Total interbank assets 1)4,6814
,9815
,3555
,689Loans to OMFIs3
,8864
,0874
,3034
,465domestic business (%)59
.761
.462
.160
.8business with other euro area countries (%)15
.216
.617
.517
.6business with the rest of the world (%)25
.122
.020
.421
.6Other claims on OMFIs
(securities and money market paper)7958941
,0521
,224domestic business (%)80
.078
.272
.768
.1business with other euro area countries (%)12
.714
.518
.419
.8business with the rest of the world (%)7
.37.38.912
.1Total loans to non-banks 2)5,8876
,2966
,7897
,392domestic business (%)91
.891
.690
.890
.2business with other euro area countries (%)2
.32.63.03.2business with the rest of the world (%)5
.95.86.26.6Fixed income securities issued by non-banks 2)1,4161
,5031
,5971
,548domestic business (%)71
.266
.960
.154
.6business with other euro area countries (%)16
.019
.224
.526
.5business with the rest of the world (%)12
.813
.915
.418
.9Equity holdings379478604745
Other assets1
,0191
,0141
,1901
,322Total assets13
,38214
,27215
,53516
,696Total interbank deposits4
,1044
,4694
,8835
,179domestic business (%)58
.958
.557
.455
.2business with other euro area countries (%)14
.515
.716
.115
.5business with the rest of the world (%)26
.625
.826
.529
.3Total deposits from non-banks 2)5,0745
,3435
,6455
,991domestic business (%)88
.587
.685
.884
.6business with other euro area countries (%)5
.55.65.35.2business with the rest of the world (%)6
.06.88.910
.2Fixed income securities 3)2,0642
,2812
,6132
,831Capital and reserves688744838924
Other liabilities1
,4521
,4351
,5561
,771Total liabilities13
,38214
,27215
,53516
,696Source: ECB.1)These items do no include shares.

2)Including general government.

3)The item includes money market paper.
Table 13Domestic and cross-border on-balance-sheet activities of euro area OMFIsconcentrated on the effects of therestructuring of the banking and financialindustry through mergers and acquisitions6and on banks™ involvement in wealth
management, namely private banking andasset management.For a number of years, the EU banking system
has been in 
a process of restructuring. In theperiod from January 1995 to June 2000, most
mergers and acquisitions involved domesticbanks and, in particular, smaller institutions.
Consolidation initially took place at thenational level and was more pronounced inthe smaller countries. By contrast, some of
the larger countries still have ratherfragmented banking markets, even though thedegree of concentration has increased. More
recently, merger and acquisition activity hasintensified and larger institutions have beenmore frequently involved. In international
bank mergers and acquisitions, mosttransactions involved at least one institutionfrom outside the European Economic Area
(EEA). Some regional banking groups and
6See the report entitled ﬁMergers and acquisitions involving the
EU banking industry Œ facts and implicationsﬂ, published by the
ECB in December 2000.124conglomerates have been established, but nodefinite ﬁtrendﬂ towards cross-bordermergers and acquisitions within the EEA, EU
or euro area could be discerned. However,
the driving forces behind the process are notconfined within national borders. The
increasing relevance of deals involving largecredit institutions appears related to thetransformation of money and capital market
activity in the EU and euro area after theintroduction of the euro. The trend towardsbank consolidation in the United States signals
that some factors at play have indeed a globalreach. An additional feature of therestructuring is the formation of financial

conglomerates Œ defined as groups of financialcompanies operating in different sectors ofthe financial industry Œ which was observed

in many Member States. The process ofconglomeration is mainly bank-driven, asbanks have been actively expanding into asset
management.Wealth management Œ comprising private
banking services for wealthy individuals andasset management, i.e. the services ofmanaging financial portfolios, selling products
and advising clients Œ is growing rapidly in theEU. This growth has provided the commercialincentive for EU banks to enter the business
at a time when competition is intensifying intheir more traditional markets. Wealthmanagement provides an opportunity for
banks to cross-sell products to clients andthus to counter trends towardsdisintermediation. Private banking issomewhat different, in that it allows for the
bundling of services and products, therebycountering the trend towards lower marginson standardised products.
Banks have played an important role in assetmanagement for many years, but their
involvement may have increased in the recentpast. Private banking, which used to beconsidered a specialist business, has seen a
significant number of new entrants, including
many of the larger universal and investment
banks. These business lines are seen by the
banks both as being more profitable and as
offering more stable returns than traditionalbanking. Their profitability is increased by the
fact that, in general, they have lower capitalrequirements because many related activitiesare conducted off-balance-sheet. Reputational
risks are however considered higher in wealthmanagement than in traditional banking.There are indications of increasing
competition in wealth management. Entrybarriers are falling owing to the developmentof the internet, which might increase the
influx of new service providers.Besides the two major areas mentionedabove, new work was initiated by the BSC inthe field of analysing country risk, while work
on central credit registers and supervisory
early warning systems continued.
3Developments in the regulatory field
At the core of the developments in the
regulatory field at the international level wasthe revision of the framework for banks™ capitaladequacy carried out by the Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision (BCBS). In the year 2000most of the work of the BCBS was devoted torefining its proposal and a second consultative
paper was released in January 2001, forcomments by the end of May. It is planned forthe new framework to be adopted by the end

of 2001 and implemented in 2004 by all G10countries, or even worldwide, given the global
reach of the Basel Accord.The proposed new regulatory regime restson three pillars. The first pillar Œ minimumcapital requirements Œ relies on a newframework for measuring credit risk, which
includes: (i) the reshaping of the standardisedapproach, providing for the use of the ratingsattributed by the external agencies, and
(ii) the introduction of the internal ratings-based (IRB) approach, relying on the riskmeasurement systems adopted by the banks
themselves. Other relevant elements of thefirst pillar are the explicit supervisory
treatment of asset securitisation, the125recognition of a wide range of risk mitigationtechniques and a specific capital charge foroperational risk. The other two pillars include
the supervisory review process and enhancedmarket discipline. The former is intended toensure that banks™ capital positions are in

line with their overall risk profile. The latteraims at providing market participants withthe necessary information to allow them to
make an adequate assessment of the riskprofile and capital adequacy of banks. One ofthe main innovative features of the new
regulatory regime is the greater overall risksensitivity of the capital requirements. It alsoprovides banks with incentives to move along
the spectrum of approaches proposed foraddressing credit and operational risk, thus
adopting more sophisticated and risk-
sensitive techniques.The ECB, which participates as an observerin the BCBS, submitted an opinion on thefirst consultative paper issued by the BCBS inJune 1999. This opinion focused mainly on

the need to strike the right balance betweeninstruments for disciplining the risk-takingbehaviour of individual banks (the micro level)
and the overall impact of regulatory capitalon financial and macroeconomic conditions(the macro level).At the EU level, the main developments in theregulatory field included work on: (i) the
regulatory capital requirements for EU creditinstitutions and investment firms, and(ii) financial conglomerates. Both initiatives
are being carried out by the EuropeanCommission with the assistance of therelevant sectoral advisory committees, in line
with the priorities set in the Financial Services
Action Plan in order to refine the EUregulatory framework for financial markets.
In both fields, the European Commission isexpected to put forward a proposal for adraft Directive in the course of 2001.
The work on capital adequacy in the EU is
intended to bring the Community rules on
capital adequacy into line with the new regimeto be agreed by the BCBS, while taking into
account the specificity of the EU financial

sector and the fact that the regulatoryframework is legally binding on all EU credit
institutions and investment firms. At the
beginning of 2001 the European Commissionissued a second consultative paper outliningthe main aspects of the new regulatory
framework.The work on financial conglomerates aims at
establishing a comprehensive regulatoryframework in the EU. The latter is intended
to cover several issues, including the capital
adequacy of financial conglomerates, intra-group transactions and risk concentration,the fitness and propriety of managers and
the suitability of shareholders, the role
of a co-ordinator in the supervision ofconglomerates and the exchange of
information among authorities. The ECB alsocontributes to the work of the EuropeanCommission by participating in BAC as an
observer.In addition, the Directive on there-organisation and winding down of creditinstitutions, providing for mutual recognitionof such proceedings, has been adopted.VU Ð Ziekenhuis,Kinderkliniek Amsterdam,the Netherlands
UntitledChapter VIIIProductionof the euro banknotes and coinsand preparations for thecash changeover1281Production of the euro banknotes and coins
Euro banknotes are being produced by theNCBs and by privately and publicly ownedcompanies. Printing is proceeding at the 14printing works involved in euro banknote

production. (The printing works in Greece, alate entrant, started production in the lastquarter of 2000.) The volumes required have
been revised in the light of Greece™s entry tothe Eurosystem and of changes in theestimated requirements. It will now be
necessary to have available some 14.25 billionbanknotes (including both the launch and thelogistical stocks; see Table 14) with a totalface value of around 
642 billion by January2002.The Member States are responsible for theproduction of euro coins. They are being

struck by 15 mints in 11 countries. Accordingto current estimates, the total number ofeuro coins will be around 50 billion, with a
value of close to 16 billion.2Quality of the euro banknotes and coins
A database has been established in order tocompile quality-related information from themints and the printing works. This databasewill be used to provide monthly aggregated
data regarding the quality of euro banknotesand coins.2.1Quality of the banknotes
The goal of ensuring a common qualitystandard throughout all of the participatingprinting works is a demanding one. The
implementation of a common quality systemhas involved a substantial amount of workand the system has now been confirmed as

being operational in all printing works. Workcontinues on optimising the quality systems.The mechanisms for identifying variations areworking well and any quality variations whichdo occur are subject to investigation andcareful decision-making within the scope of
the established ISO 9000-based procedures.2.2Quality of the coins
The ECB continues to act as an independentassessor of coin quality, carrying out its
responsibilities at the mints involved in eurocoin production. These responsibilitiesinclude supporting the quality system,
monitoring of mints via periodic quality audits,and monthly reporting on progress. Progressthroughout the year was steady and the
ECB did not have to alert the ministers offinance and economy to any quality-relatedproblems.3Protecting the euro banknotes and coins against counterfeiting
The implementation of the Counterfeit
Monitoring System (CMS) database, which will
store technical and statistical data oncounterfeit euro banknotes and coins, hasproceeded in accordance with the timetable.
Following the drafting of the userrequirements and the conducting of afeasibility study in 1999, the functional
specifications were completed in the first halfof 2000. This was followed by thedevelopment phase. It is envisaged that theimplementation, testing and acceptance of theCMS will continue until June 2001. A five-
month period (July to November 2001) hasbeen allocated for training and correctivemeasures, if needed. Finally, in December
2001, one month before the issue of the eurobanknotes and coins, the CMS database willbecome operational.In parallel with the CMS database, the
Counterfeit Analysis Centre (CAC) is being129set up at the ECB. The basic activities
involved in the establishment of this Centreare the recruitment of its staff Œ including
counterfeit experts and technical andadministrative staff Œ and the acquisition of
the required specialised technical equipment.
The CAC will be equipped with theinstruments necessary for analysingdifferences between counterfeit and genuine
banknotes, particularly in respect of thesecurity features of the euro banknotes.
Contacts with Europol, Interpol and theEuropean Commission have been stepped upwith a view to establishing the communication
and collaboration arrangements necessary toensure an effective information flow for the
purposes of preventing and combatingcounterfeiting.The ECB, together with Europol and theEuropean Commission, co-operated closelyto prepare a draft Council Regulation on the

protection of the euro against counterfeiting.The ECB was duly consulted in September2000 and presented its Opinion in December.
4The Euro 2002 Information Campaign
As part of the preparations for theintroduction of the euro banknotes and coins,the ECB and the 12 NCBs of the Eurosystem
are conducting a ﬁEuro 2002 InformationCampaignﬂ. The campaign has a budget of80 million. Following a public competition,Publicis Worldwide B.V. was chosen as the
agency to assist the ECB with the campaign.The contract was signed in spring 2000 and
the campaign is being implemented
internationally by the ECB and nationally bythe 12 NCBs of the Eurosystem.The campaign, which is being co-ordinatedwith similar initiatives prepared by national
authorities, focuses on:the appearance of the banknotes and coins,
the authentication features,the denominations, andthe overall changeover modalities.Three principal channels are being used todeliver these messages: a mass media
campaign, public relations and press activities,
and co-operation with other groups active inthis area (the Partnership Programme).4.1The Mass Media Campaign
The Mass Media Campaign Œ which will startin late 2001 and run through to early 2002 Œwill support the introduction of eurobanknotes and coins by providing the generalpublic with information on their appearance
and authentication features and on the cashchangeover. The campaign will run ontelevision and in newspapers in all euro area
countries. The design of the media materialand the choice of slots, etc. will be co-ordinated nationally in order to maximise use
of the relevant media landscape, as well as toensure co-ordination of content and media
plans with other campaigns, particularly those
organised by the national authorities.4.2PR and press activities
Public interest in the introduction of eurobanknotes and coins will grow significantly as1 January 2002 approaches. The campaignendeavours to maximise this interest and to
ensure that accurate information about thebanknotes and coins is provided via publicrelations and press activities. These efforts

will contribute to raising awareness aboutthe changeover and to making the publicmore receptive to the new money. A PR

programme is being rolled out over the
course of 2001. It includes the ﬁEuro 2002Information Campaign conferencesﬂ Œ a series
of conferences in Eurosystem countries Œ anda ﬁCountdown to the euroﬂ, which highlightssignificant countdown dates and involves the130distribution of media kits, etc. to support the
PR programme. As with other elements ofthe campaign, this is being implemented both
nationally and internationally.4.3The Partnership Programme
The aim of the Partnership Programme is tobroaden the impact of the InformationCampaign:by involving partners who can help to
accurately inform the public about the
changeover;by maximising the multiplier effect that
these organisations can have; andby ensuring an efficient distribution of
Eurosystem information on euro banknotesand coins to where it will be most needed,for example, retail outlets.The public, banking, retail, tourism, travel andeducational sectors are some of the key areas

involved.The Partnership Programme is being
implemented nationally by the NCBs andinternationally by the ECB.4.4Other elements
A dedicated website was launched at thebeginning of 2001 at www.euro.ecb.int. It

has a central role to play in making
comprehensive information available on eurobanknotes and coins.The campaign also focuses on cashiers andpolice forces, as well as target groups outside

the euro area. Specific measures are beingtaken to help vulnerable sectors of thepopulation.A number of initiatives have already beenundertaken to ensure that comprehensive
information will also be made available outsidethe euro area, with particular emphasis on the
accession countries, as well as certain other
countries in which the currencies of Eurosystemcountries are widely used.1Guideline of the ECB adopting certain provisions on the 2002
cash changeover (ECB/2001/1), OJ L 55, 24.2.2001, p. 80.
5Changeover to the euro banknotes and coins in 2002
With regard to the cash changeover, a
Eurosystem Cash Changeover Co-ordinationCommittee was established comprising
representatives from the ECB and the12 NCBs. The Committee will have overallresponsibility for the co-ordination of the
changeover to euro banknotes and coinsthrough to the end of February 2002. It willmonitor the preparatory work relating to
the issuance of, and changeover to, the eurobanknotes and coins as well as establish aEurosystem-wide information exchange
framework in the run-up to -day andthereafter. Similar committees wereestablished to prepare for the adoption of
the euro at the beginning of 1999 and for thetransition to the year 2000.5.1Financial modalities for the 2002
cash changeoverThe Governing Council of the ECB has agreedon the general principles of the frameworkfor the 2002 cash changeover.1 In reaching
its decisions, the Governing Council took dueaccount of the major role which credit
institutions will play in making the 2002 cash
changeover a successful operation. Thesedecisions relate to the following matters:frontloading/sub-frontloading,the debiting model, andcoverage of risks.131Frontloading/sub-frontloadingThe Eurosystem recognises that theshortening of the cash changeover period
agreed by the ECOFIN Council in November1999 will require the active frontloading of
euro banknotes and coins to credit
institutions and, through the latter, to certainother target groups (i.e. sub-frontloading to
retailers, cash-in-transit companies and thecash-operated machine industry).In the light of this, the Governing Council hasapproved the start of frontloading and sub-
frontloading of banknotes to professional
target groups as from 1 September 2001.However, each NCB is free to operate within
the maximum lead time in order to meet the
needs of frontloading. This also implies thatthe lead time determined nationally may differfrom target group to target group as well as

between banknotes and coins. In ninecountries the national authorities areproviding euro coins to credit institutions as
from September 2001 because their bulkmakes them more difficult to transport and
their lower value means that the risk to credit
institutions is lower than for banknotes.Three countries envisage frontloadingbanknotes at the same time. Most of the
other countries will postpone the distributionof banknotes until November or December2001.With regard to the different target groups,all countries acknowledge the need to supply
credit institutions with both euro banknotesand coins prior to 1 January 2002.In addition, 11 countries will provide the retailsector with euro coins and in particularlow-denomination euro banknotes prior to
-day (sub-frontloading). This is due to the factthat, unlike banknotes, coins are generallybrought into active circulation by the retail
sector, rather than by credit institutions. Withregard to the cash-operated industry and inview of the need to load machines with coins
prior to -day, seven countries will sub-frontload coins to this sector, while the otherfive are considering this option.According to the ECOFIN Council statementmade in November 1999, euro coins can beprovided to the general public in the second
half of December 2001. The supply of eurocoins to the general public is currently
envisaged in ten countries. However, there
are no plans at this stage to provide coins tothe general public in two countries, becausethese countries take the view that the
possible benefits of supplying the public witheuro coins do not outweigh the distributioncosts or the risks associated with early
circulation.Debiting modelThe Governing Council agreed on a debitingmodel which will adequately reflect additionalcash holdings of credit institutions resultingfrom the 2002 cash changeover. The debiting
model, which is simple and easy to implement,will not interfere with the relationshipbetween credit institutions and their clients.
Thus:euro banknotes and coins frontloaded to
credit institutions or their appointedagents shall  be debited in their respective
accounts with the NCBs, at face value, in
accordance with the ﬁlinear debitingmodelﬂ, i.e. one-third of the frontloadedsum on 2, 23 and 30 January 2002

respectively;euro cash delivered to and returned by
credit institutions as from 1 January 2002
is to be debited/credited in accordancewith current practice; andcash denominated in national currencyunits and returned to credit institutions asfrom 1 January 2002 is to be credited inaccordance with current practice.Coverage of risksThe Governing Council has approved thefollowing scheme for the coverage of risks:
Frontloaded euro banknotes shall remain theproperty of NCBs until the end of December
1322001. In the event that arrangements for theretention of ownership are not consideredby NCBs to be legally feasible or legally

enforceable, eligible assets can be providedas collateral for the NCBs™ rights with regard
to frontloaded euro banknotes. Such assets
may also be provided as collateral in parallelwith arrangements for the retention ofownership.Eligible assets shall be provided to NCBs bythe close of business on the last business day
of 2001, at the latest, as collateral for the
amounts of frontloaded banknotes and coinsdelivered on or before 31 December 2001.All assets considered eligible collateral forEurosystem credit operations or other such
assets as may be approved by the GoverningCouncil upon the proposal of an NCB areeligible as collateral for frontloading and sub-
frontloading. Cash in the form of a deposit
on a dedicated account, remunerated at thesame rate as applied for minimum reserves,

or in another form deemed appropriate by
the NCBs, can also be provided as eligiblecollateral.NCBs shall ensure that credit institutionscover at least the risk of loss resulting from
the destruction, theft or robbery of frontloaded
banknotes and coins, which remain theproperty of NCBs, by taking out insurance
policies or by any other appropriate means.The conditions for frontloading take no accountof the credit institutions™ own risk insurance,
which remains their sole responsibility.In order to ascertain compliance by creditinstitutions or their appointed agents with
their obligations regarding the prevention of
anticipated public use of the frontloaded euro
banknotes, and with the sole purpose ofverifying the presence of the frontloaded
banknotes, NCBs may ensure that auditing
and inspection provisions are included in anystatutory or contractual arrangements drawn
up for frontloading.Any breach by the credit institutions or theirappointed agents of their obligations,including, but not limited to, putting the eurobanknotes into circulation or acting in a waythat is conducive to putting them into
circulation before 1 January 2002, shall bedeemed to damage the Eurosystem™sobjective of a smooth cash changeover and

shall be subject to the payment of contractualor statutory penalties, as appropriate, to berequired by NCBs in an amount proportional

to the respective damage.In turn, the credit institutions will be requiredby NCBs to include provisions in their sub-frontloading contracts with retailers thatprovide an equivalent level of protection.Eligible assets shall be provided to NCBs ascollateral from the moment of sub-

frontloading and for the amounts of sub-frontloaded banknotes and coins untildischarge of the guaranteed obligations.5.2Cash changeover in markets outside
the euro areaGiven that the euro in fiduciary form will beput into circulation as from 1 January 2002every effort should be made to ensure thesmooth introduction of and changeover to
the new currency, in order that customersrequiring euro banknotes can obtain them inan efficient manner. In the light of this, it is
also very important to proactively addressthe issue of the international changeover andto adequately prepare both the markets and
the public located outside the euro area inorder to keep costs and disruptions to aminimum.The Governing Council of the ECB hasadopted the following measures which will
help to ensure the smooth launch of eurobanknotes and coins outside the euro area:credit institutions which are counterparties
for monetary policy operations within the
Eurosystem will be allowed to distribute
frontloaded euro banknotes to theirbranches, or headquarters, as appropriate,located outside the euro area;133credit institutions with their main place ofbusiness inside the euro area will beallowed to sub-frontload euro banknotes
to their subsidiaries which are also creditinstitutions and located outside the euroarea; andcredit institutions with their main place ofbusiness inside the euro area will beallowed to sub-frontload to other credit

institutions which have neither theirregistered nor their head office inside the
euro area.The financial modalities applicable tofrontloading/sub-frontloading are those
outlined under section 5.1 with the exceptionthat credit institutions will only be allowedto start distributing euro banknotes to
markets outside the euro area as from1 December 2001. In addition, outside the
euro area, it will not be possible to sub-
frontload euro banknotes to any third parties
whatsoever.Apart from these steps, the Eurosystem isexploring additional measures in the first halfof 2001, including the direct involvement of

central banks outside the euro area.5.3Duration of the dual circulation
periodIn practice, the actual speed of the cash
changeover will depend on the response of the
public, on the capacity of the various parties

involved and on existing national infrastructures.
The longer the cash changeover period, thehigher the dual cash handling costs to be borne
by the credit institutions and the retail sector
will be. In the light of this, a consensus hasemerged in favour of shortening the period of
dual circulation considerably from the maximum
of six months decided by the EU Council in
1995.In eight Member States the dual circulation
period will last until the end of February 2002.

Some countries have opted for a dualcirculation period which is shorter than themaximum two months agreed by the ECOFINCouncil. In the Netherlands the guilderwill cease to be legal tender on28 January 2002. Germany has decided to

withdraw legal tender status from its nationalbanknotes and coins at the end of 2001, but
this legal ﬁbig bangﬂ is accompanied by a

commitment on the part of the differentsectors concerned to accept the DeutscheMark at least until 28 February 2002. In
Ireland (subject to government approval) andFrance national banknotes and coins willcease to be legal tender on 9 and 17 February
2002 respectively.Details of the national changeover plans can befound on the Eurosystem™s official euro websiteat www.euro.ecb.int in the section ﬁGettingready for the euroﬂ.5.4Exchange of national banknotes at
national central banksEuro banknotes and coins will not be issueduntil 1 January 2002. In the meantime,banknotes in the euro area continue to be inthe national currencies. During the
transitional period, to ensure substitutabilitybetween the national currency units, the
exchange of banknotes denominated in the
national currencies of the euro area is
governed by Article 52 of the Statute of theESCB. This means that each NCB will, at
least in one location in the respectivecountry, ensure that banknotes of other
participating Member States can be either
exchanged against national banknotes and
coins or, upon request, credited to anaccount with the institution effecting the
exchange if the national legislation providesfor this. In both cases, exchange will be at therespective par value. The Governing Council

has decided to extend the current Article 52arrangements beyond 2001 until the end ofMarch 2002. In this case, national currency
units will be exchanged against euro.Some 500 NCB branches throughout theeuro area have continued to be involved inthe exchange of non-national euro area
banknotes. Banknotes repatriated under this134arrangement to their respective issuing
countries were worth a total value of
9.3 billion and amounted to 169.7 millionbanknotes in total.5.5Adaptation of ATMs, currency
sorting and accepting machinesIn May and September 2000 centralised testweeks for the manufacturers of banknote-accepting and processing machines were
organised under the supervision of the ECBin Neu-Isenburg, near Frankfurt. The goal wasto offer companies an opportunity to test

the euro banknotes in order to gain basicinformation which would be of assistance inadapting the machines and sensors to the
euro banknotes. In total, 55 companiesparticipated in the tests. On the basis of the
analyses of the test results, the company
Belgium530
Germany4,342

Greece597

Spain1,924
France2,240
Ireland222

Italy2,380

Luxembourg46
Netherlands659
Austria550

Portugal536
Finland225
Total for the euro area14,251
Table 14Number of euro banknotes to beproduced by 1 January 2002(in millions)representatives were generally satisfiedwith the machine-readability of the eurobanknotes.135Sir-Karl-Popper-Schule,Vienna,Austria
Designed by Christian Ludwig Attersee.Untitled
Chapter IXDevelopment of thestatistical framework1381Introduction
In 2000 the statistical work of the ECBfocused on ensuring that the informationneeded to support the functions of theEurosystem continued to be received,
processed, disseminated and published in atimely manner to high quality standardsand with good supporting documentation.
This work was carried out in close co-operation with the NCBs, which collect datafrom reporting agents and compile the

national statistics necessary to construct theeuro area aggregates. The basis for the euro
area statistics compiled by the ECB is
presented in a document entitled ﬁStatisticalinformation collected and compiled by theESCBﬂ, dated May 2000. This document is an
update of the report entitled ﬁStatisticalrequirements for Stage Three of MonetaryUnion (Implementation Package)ﬂ of July1996, and describes the statistics currentlyprovided. The document covers money and
banking and related statistics, balance ofpayments and related statistics and financialaccounts, including government finance
statistics. Information needs in the areas ofprices and costs, national accounts, the labourmarket, government receipts and
expenditure, short-term indicators of outputand demand, and business and consumersurveys, which were originally stated in the
Implementation Package, are reaffirmed in thedocument entitled ﬁStatistical requirementsof the ECB in the field of general economic
statisticsﬂ of August 2000.
2Money and banking statistics and statistics on financial markets
The compilation and publication of
consolidated Monetary Financial Institution(MFI) balance sheet statistics in the euroarea proceeded smoothly in 2000, allowing
timely reporting of euro area monetarydevelopments by the ECB. In April thepublication of quarterly data in the ECB

Monthly Bulletin was extended to cover, inparticular, the counterpart and instrumentbreakdowns of deposits held at MFIs, and the
breakdown by instrument of MFIs™ mainoutstanding claims on and liabilities to therest of the world. Seasonally adjusted
monetary aggregates are published eachmonth; the methodology is described in anECB document entitled ﬁSeasonal adjustment
of monetary aggregates and HICP for the
euro areaﬂ and published in August 2000.Better consistency has been achievedbetween flows derived from the euro areaMFIs™ consolidated balance sheet and
corresponding balance of payments flows.MFIs report balance sheet data on a monthlyand quarterly basis. The ﬁList of MFIsﬂ,updated monthly, is published on the ECB™swebsite. It is necessary to maintain a
consistent application of the definition of anMFI across the euro area and the EuropeanUnion.The ECB Regulation concerning theconsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector(ECB/1998/16), which entered into force on
1 January 1999, was updated in 2000. Thefirst update, which was finalised in August,made a number of changes that enhance legal
clarity for the application of the minimumreserve system. These concerned the laterevision of minimum reserves data, mergers

and divisions involving credit institutions(which are the majority of MFIs) and therevision of Annex II of the ECB Regulation. A
second update was finalised in earlyNovember and provides for transitionalprovisions relating to the minimum reserves
system in the light of Greece™s entry into theeuro area. In addition, work started onimproving the MFI balance sheet statistics and
harmonising the way revaluation adjustmentsare made to derive flows from the MFI
balance sheet statistics. MFI (ﬁretailﬂ) interest
rate statistics are also being improved; in thecourse of 2000 a start was made on aharmonised reporting framework. At present139ten euro area retail interest rates are availablewith a monthly frequency on the basis ofexisting national statistics. These are
published in the ECB Monthly Bulletin. TheECB also publishes key national retail interestrates for all EU Member States on its website.

The ECB collects available data on electronicmoney and will publish them at regularintervals. The ESCB is aware of the

implications of new requirements for
reporting agents and performs a preparatorymerits and costs analysis in which they may
be consulted.In November an amended ECB Guideline wasissued concerning certain statistical reporting
requirements of the ECB and the proceduresfor reporting by the national central banks in
the field of money and banking statistics. TheECB Guideline is binding on the Eurosystem.The monthly securities issues statistics, whichwere first published in late 1999 with abreakdown by original maturity, residency and

currency of denomination, were improved in2000 in terms of coverage, sectoralbreakdown and data accuracy. Early in the

year a breakdown by issuing sector waspublished for outstanding amounts and grossissues denominated in euro, followed by a
further expansion in March 2000, with the

sectoral breakdown for net issues. Historicaldata on securities issues were published on
the ECB™s website in March 2001.Data on stock market indices have beenextended. Financial market statistics are
published in the ECB Monthly Bulletin andare also available on the ECB™s website.The first set of quarterly data on theaggregated balance sheet of credit institutions(as opposed to the MFI sector as a whole)
has been reported for the purposes of macro-
prudential analysis.Preparations were carried out in 2000 forthe development of quarterly balance sheetand related statistics on non-monetary
financial intermediaries other than insurance
corporations and pension funds. Collectiveinvestment institutions (excluding money
market funds, which are in the MFI sector)account for the bulk of such intermediariesin the euro area.3Balance of payments, international reserves and international
investment position statistics, and effective exchange ratesThe compilation and publication of monthly andquarterly euro area balance of paymentsstatistics proceeded smoothly in 2000. Further
improvements, where needed, were made inthe Member States™ contribution to the euroarea aggregate. The ECB has contributed to
discussions about the future development ofbalance of payments data collection systems,especially those relying on traditional bank
settlement sources, in the new circumstances
created by EMU. One aim is to ease cross-
border payments within the euro area.
With regard to the reliability of statistics,portfolio investment and the other
investment account present the greatestchallenges to compilers of balance of
payments and related statistics. Further work
has been undertaken on the creation of acentralised securities database, which is seenas the key to significant improvements in
portfolio investment data in the medium term.
Moreover, it should also bring significant
benefits to other statistical areas of concern
to the ECB. A major difficulty remains the
recording of holdings of negotiable securities.
The fourth edition of the publication entitledﬁEuropean Union balance of payments/international investment position statistical
methodsﬂ provides detailed information forusers of these statistics. The new edition
includes a compilation guide, describing in
more detail the underlying methodology usedfor each balance of payments andinternational investment position item.140Regarding statistics on international reserves,in 2000 the ECB started to publish aggregateddata for the Eurosystem with separate data
for the ECB, using the template oninternational reserves and foreign currency
liquidity developed jointly by the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Bank forInternational Settlements (BIS). Since April2000 a complete set of monthly data using
the template has been published on the ECB™swebsite. In October the ECB published adocument explaining in detail the compilation
of the international reserves of theEurosystem. Consistent national data arepublished by Member States.Net international investment position datafor the euro area relating to the end of 1999,
together with revised data for the end of1997 and end of 1998, were published in2000. The ECB will require data in a form
permitting the external assets and liabilitiesof the euro area as a whole to be compiledseparately from September 2002 onwards
(data for the end of 2001).Through the adoption of Guideline
No. ECB/2000/4 by the Governing Council
on 11 May 2000, the legal framework for the
compilation of the euro area balance ofpayments, international reserves and
international investment position statistics
was updated.The ECB publishes data on nominal and realeffective exchange rates for the euro. Inaddition to the indices which have been
compiled by the ECB since October 1999 oneffective exchange rates, indices covering thecurrencies of a wider group of trading
partners and more deflators (producer prices,unit labour costs) have been published sinceApril 2000.4Financial accounts
In 2000 the ECB intensified its work on
financial accounts, which will cover quarterlyfinancial flows and a quarterly statement of
financial assets and liabilities outstanding.
Financial accounts are a useful analytical toolto support the conduct of monetary policyand other tasks of the Eurosystem. They link

real economy developments (saving andinvestment) with financial transactions andbalance sheets, and shed light on the way

monetary policy affects the euro areaeconomy.For the compilation of data on the financingand investment of euro area non-financialsectors, two main sources are available Œeuro area financial statistics and nationalfinancial accounts. Euro area financial statisticsare compiled by the ECB in closeco-operation with national authorities,
whereas national financial accounts data arecompiled by Member States. Euro areafinancial statistics cover, for the time being,

monetary statistics, balance of payments andinternational investment position statistics,
and securities issues statistics, and are
properly consolidated at the euro area level.Although national financial accounts cannotyet be consolidated at the euro area level,
they will be very useful for the constructionof euro area financial accounts.5Government finance statistics
In September 2000 the ECB introduced in itsMonthly Bulletin a new and extendedpresentation of euro area general governmentfiscal positions based mainly on data provided
by NCBs, with detailed information about
government debt and an analysis of thedifference between the government deficitand the change in government debt. The ECB
co-operates closely with the EuropeanCommission in this area.1416General economic statistics
In addition to money and banking statistics,balance of payments statistics and financialaccounts, economic statistics are alsoimportant for carrying out of the tasks of the
Eurosystem. Economic statistics include priceand cost data, national accounts, governmentrevenue and expenditure (on which the
European Commission enacted a newRegulation (No. 1500/2000) in July 2000),labour market statistics and a wide range of
other economic statistics.Responsibility for economic statistics at the EUlevel lies mainly with the European Commission(Eurostat). The ECB works closely with theEuropean Commission to have the requirements

in this area satisfied. The availability of statisticsfor all euro area countries and a sufficient degreeof harmonisation in the national data areparticularly important. Following a request fromthe ECOFIN Council, the ECB and the European

Commission collaborated closely to establishan Action Plan identifying those fields for eachMember State and for each statistical area where
urgent progress is needed. The areas identifiedas most needing improvement include quarterlynational accounts, quarterly public finance

statistics, labour market statistics, a range ofdata in the area of short-term business
indicators, and external trade statistics. The
Action Plan, presented to the ECOFIN Council
in September, also proposes modifications tostatistical regulations.7Co-operation with the European Commission and international
institutionsAt the European level, the division of
statistical responsibilities between the ECBand the European Commission (Eurostat)
continued to work well in 2000. Money andbanking statistics are the responsibility of theECB; responsibility for balance of payments,

international investment position and financialaccounts statistics is shared between the ECBand the European Commission; prices, costs

and other economic statistics are theresponsibility of the European Commission.
The ECB also has close contacts with otherinternational organisations regarding thedevelopment of statistics, in particular with
the IMF and the BIS. In co-operation with
Community institutions and internationalorganisations, the ECB contributes to defining
current international statistical standards andpromotes adherence to them.8Statistics relating to non-participating Member States and
accession countriesAll EU Member States have been stronglyencouraged to undertake the statistical
preparations for participation in Stage Three
of EMU. Details on the statistical implicationsof the enlargement of the euro area to include
Greece are provided in Chapter III.
In 2000 the Eurosystem provided technical
assistance to the central banks of thosecountries aiming to join the EU, the accession
countries. The ECB itself provided assistance,
in particular through multilateral seminars.This technical assistance is primarily intendedto help the accession countries to implement
data collection and compilation systems thatwill allow them, in due course, to meet theECB™s statistical requirements, and to
contribute to fully consistent (aggregated andconsolidated) statistics for the euro area. Thiswill pave the way for their future integration
into the ESCB and, later, the Eurosystem.Methodological manuals covering theaccession countries are in preparation.Jardim de Inf›ncia de Gueif‰es,nû1 Ð Maia,Portugal
Designed by Emerenciano,In’s,Ricardo,Maria and Ana.Title:All together
Chapter XOther tasks and activities1441Advisory functions
1In accordance with the Protocol on certain provisions relating
to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
as annexed to the Treaty, Article 105 (4) of the Treaty and
Article 4 of the Statute of the ESCB shall not apply to the United
Kingdom. Hence, the obligation to consult the ECB does not
extend to the national authorities of the United Kingdom.2Other than the United Kingdom (see footnote 1).
Article 105 (4) of the Treaty and Article 4 ofthe Statute of the ESCB require that the ECBbe consulted by the relevant Communityinstitution and the responsible national
authorities,1 as appropriate, on any proposed
Community or national legislation which falls
within the ECB™s fields of competence.The limits and conditions applicable to theconsultation of the ECB by national

authorities in respect of draft legislation areset out in Council Decision 98/415/EC of29 June 1998. Article 2 (1) and (2) of this
Decision elaborates the specific areas inwhich the ECB is to be consulted, namely on
any draft legislation relating to:currency matters;means of payment;NCBs;the collection, compilation and distribution
of monetary, financial, banking, payment

systems and balance of payments statistics;
payment and settlement systems; andrules applicable to financial institutions
insofar as they materially influence thestability of financial institutions andmarkets.In addition, the authorities of non-euro areaMember States2 must also consult the ECB
on any draft legislative provisions on theinstruments of monetary policy.In total, 32 consultations were initiated in2000, three of which related to the adoption
of the euro by Greece; four involved theintroduction of the euro banknotes and coinsin 2002 and seven involved Community legal
acts. The remaining consultations related tonational legislative proposals.The box below summarises the consultations
initiated in 2000.
No.1OriginatorSubject
Box 12Consultation procedures in 20001AustriaAustrian Banking Act.
2European CommissionReclassification of settlements under swap arrangements and under forward
rate agreements.3DenmarkThe Law on Statistics Denmark regarding the incorporation of a legal basis
for the collection and compilation of financial statistics by Danmarks
Nationalbank.4PortugalImplementation of Directive 98/26/EC of 19 May 1998 on settlement finality
in payment and securities settlement systems (ﬁSettlement Finality Directiveﬂ).5The NetherlandsClosure of De Nederlandsche Bank on 5 May 2000.
6DenmarkDeposit and Investor Guarantee Act.
7GreeceArticles of the Statute of the Bank of Greece and other issues relating to the
adoption of the euro by Greece.8FinlandCentralisation of book-entry registers with a central securities depository.
9AustriaThe participation of Austria in the IMF
™s Reduction of Multilateral ExternalDebts of Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.14510EU CouncilEuropean Parliament and Council Regulation (EC) amending Council
Regulation (EC) No. 2223/96 on the reclassification of settlements underswap arrangements and under forward rate agreements.11LuxembourgElectronic commerce.

12EU CouncilEuro regulations on Greece.
13IrelandOrders under the Economic and Monetary Union Act, 1998.
14AustriaThe ways in which measures in the field of currency in connection with the
issuance of euro banknotes and coins are to be adopted (Euro Act) and theways in which the Austrian Coinage Act of 1988 and the Central Bank Act of1984 are to be amended.15GreeceRatification of the amendments to the Statute of the Bank of Greece endorsed
by its General Assembly of Shareholders on 25 April 2000.
16IrelandCounterfeiting of euro-denominated banknotes and coins.

17GermanyIssue of a DEM 1 gold coin and the establishment of a 
ﬁMonetary StabilityﬂFoundation.18LuxembourgCirculation of securities and other financial instruments and the transfer of
title by way of security (amending and completing several other acts).19FranceIntroduction of the euro in Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon and Mayotte.
220EU CouncilProtection of the euro against counterfeiting.
21GreeceAdditional measures in implementing Council Regulations (EC) 1103/97,
974/98 and 2866/98, as applicable, on the introduction of the euro.22SpainIntroduction of the euro.

23GermanyCollection of balance of payments statistics in Germany.
24DenmarkDanish Securities Trading Act.
25AustriaAncillary measures for, and the amendment of the existing legislation
governing, the introduction of the euro in relation to co-operatives (Euro-GenBeG).26SwedenModification of the Sveriges Riksbank Act (1988:1385).

27European CommissionTwo Commission Regulations on the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices.
28GermanyCollection of balance of payments statistics in Germany.
29The NetherlandsCoinage Act (in relation to the introduction of the euro coins).

30EU CouncilModification of Article 10.2 of the Protocol on the Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank.
31FranceAn agreement between the Banque de France and IEDOM (Institut d
™émissiondes départements d™outre-mer).332DenmarkAct on Financial Enterprises.
1Consultations are numbered according to the order in which they are received by the ECB.
2Position taken by the ECB under Council Decision 1999/95/EC of 31 December 1998 concerning the monetary arrangements in
the French territorial communities of Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon and Mayotte, OJ L 30, 4.2.1999, p. 29.3This consultation represents a follow-up to an earlier Opinion of the ECB on the statute and role of the IEDOM
(ECB consultation procedure No. in 1999).No.1OriginatorSubject
1463The administration of the borrowing and lending operations by
the European CommunityIn accordance with Article 123 (2) of theTreaty and Article II of Council Regulation(EEC) No. 1969/88 of 24 June 1988, the
ECB continued the administration of theborrowing and lending operations concludedby the European Community under
the Medium-Term Financial Assistancemechanism.In 2000 the ECB received the sums due inrespect of capital and interest on outstandingloans from the remaining borrower country(Italy) and paid them to creditors vis-à-vis
the European Community. The total amount
of outstanding Community lending operationswith Italy, as at 31 December 1999, was2,483 million. Following the final repaymentmade by Italy in November 2000, no balance
remained outstanding at the end of 2000.2Compliance with the prohibitions on monetary financing and
privileged accessPursuant to Article 237 (d) of the Treaty, theGeneral Council of the ECB is entrusted with
the task of monitoring the fulfilment by the15 EU NCBs of their obligations underArticles 101 and 102 of the Treaty and

Council Regulations (EC) Nos. 3603/93 and3604/93. In addition, the General Councilmonitors the ECB™s compliance with these
provisions. Article 101 prohibits the ECB and
the NCBs from providing overdraft facilitiesor any other type of credit facility to
governments and Community institutions orbodies, as well as from purchasing debtinstruments directly from them. Article 102

prohibits any measure, not based on
prudential considerations, which establishesprivileged access by governments and
Community institutions or bodies to financialinstitutions. In parallel with the General Council,the European Commission monitors Member
States™ compliance with the above provisions.The General Council considers it tobe of the utmost importance that the aboveTreaty provisions and the associated CouncilRegulations (EC) be respected under
all circumstances. Monetary financing ofgovernments and public institutions, as wellas any form of privileged access to financial
institutions, could significantly hamper thecredibility of the single monetary policy and
may give rise to higher inflation expectations.Moreover, it could reduce the incentives for
further progress in fiscal consolidation in euro
area countries by providing governments withan easy way in which to finance their debt.The General Council also monitors the EUcentral banks™ secondary market purchasesof debt instruments issued by both the
domestic public sector and the publicsector of other Member States. Accordingto the recitals of Council Regulation (EC)
No. 3603/93, the acquisition of public sectordebt instruments in the secondary marketmust not be used to circumvent the objective

of Article 101 of the Treaty. Such purchasesshould not become a form of indirectmonetary financing of the public sector.For 2000, the General Council did not findany case of non-compliance with the above
Treaty requirements and the associatedCouncil Regulations (EC) by the NCBs ofMember States or by the ECB.147Helsinki Art School for Young People,Finland
Designed by Annu Martikainen.Title:Colours playing along
Chapter XIExternal communication
and accountability150IThe ECB™s communication policy and activities
1.1Communication policy objectives
The ECB attributes great importance toeffective external communication. While the
ECB has been able to draw on the expertiseand credibility of the euro area NCBs, it does
not Œ unlike the latter Œ have a long track
record of its own, and it operates in a
multilingual and multicultural environment.These factors have played a major role in the
further development and refinement of thecommunication policy of the ECB and of theEurosystem. They provide an explanation for
the fact that the ECB communicates moreactively than most other central banks.The ECB has established an externalcommunication policy based on acommitment to the principles of openness,
transparency and accountability. It isrecognised that effective communication isinstrumental in the achievement of the ECB™s
wider objectives. In line with the generallydecentralised organisation of the ESCB andthe Eurosystem, the NCBs in the Eurosystem
play an important role in achieving the goals
of the Eurosystem™s communication policy. Acontinuous co-ordination of communication
activities takes place within the ECB™sdecision-making bodies and the ExternalCommunications Committee, which brings
together the communication experts of the
ECB as well as those of the NCBs.The general objectives of the Eurosystem™scommunication policy are:to contribute to the effectiveness and

efficiency of monetary policy; andto enhance public understanding of theEurosystem and its policies in the
participating countries and beyond.Two guiding principles for achieving thesegoals have been adopted:1 A ﬁsingle voiceﬂ communication on thesingle monetary policy for the euro area isconsidered to be desirable.2The transparency of the Eurosystem™s
policy objectives, tasks and measuresshould be promoted, thereby contributingto the Eurosystem™s accountability;

confidence in and knowledge of the way inwhich the Eurosystem functions should be
fostered.A number of other principles need to beobserved in order for communication to
be effective: external communication shouldbe consistent throughout the euro area,treatment of different countries and media
should be equal and non-discriminatory, andinformation should be provided on a timelybasis.The Statute of the ESCB imposes somecommunication obligations on the ECB by
law. The ECB is required to publish a reporton the activities of the ESCB at least once
every quarter, and it has to deliver an
Annual Report on these activities and onthe monetary policy of the Eurosystem.Furthermore, the ECB is obliged to publish a
consolidated weekly financial statement of theEurosystem.Since the introduction of the euro on1 January 1999, the ECB has taken the view
that it should go beyond the legal

requirements in its communication efforts.From the outset, it was recognised that manymeans of communication would have to be
used in order to reach the ultimatecommunication objectives. This recognitionled to, among other things, the decisions to
publish an ECB Monthly Bulletin, rather thanjust a quarterly report, and to hold pressconferences at regular intervals.Based on the above-mentioned general
principles, the Eurosystem uses a host of
different communication tools. The membersof the Executive Board of the ECB and thegovernors of the NCBs, as well as the staff
of the Eurosystem, dedicate a significant
amount of time and resources to externalcommunication. The decision-making bodies151of the ECB and the External CommunicationsCommittee continuously review the extent
to which the general objectives are being
met.1.2Communication activities
In its choice of communication tools, the ECBseeks to disseminate information to the
general public and its elected representatives,to financial markets and to other interest
groups in a way that takes due account of thediversity of the target groups. A number ofdifferent channels are used to meet these
requirements:Press conferences are held by the
President and the Vice-President on aregular basis, usually immediately after thefirst Governing Council meeting of each
month.The ECB™s Monthly Bulletin normally
appears a week after the first Governing
Council meeting of the month, and
contains details of the ECB™s view on theeconomic situation, as well as articles on
special issues relating to the activities of
the Eurosystem. In addition, the ECB™sMonthly Bulletin includes a statistics
section providing a wide range of economicand financial data on the euro area.The Annual Report of the ECB is a meansof giving an account of the monetary policyof the previous and current years. It also
deals with other activities of the
Eurosystem and the ESCB.
The President of the ECB appears before
the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament once a
quarter. These public hearings are dealtwith in Chapter XI, Section 2, of this
Annual Report.Public speeches and interviews given
by the members of the ECB™s decision-
making bodies constitute an importantway of directly addressing importantaudiences.Press releases mainly serve to makestatistical information or short policyannouncements available to the public.Brochures and other printed publicationsare provided for target groups rangingfrom the general public to specialists in
various fields.The Working Paper Series seeks to

disseminate the results of research
conducted within the ECB, or presentedin the context of ECB conferences andseminars, to the broad academic and
financial market communities. The ECB™sWorking Papers are published in the nameof the authors.
The Occasional Paper Series, launched inJuly 2000, presents policy-related topicsto a wide audience, including other policy-
makers, academics, the media and thegeneral public. The ECB™s OccasionalPapers are published in the name of the
authors.The direct feeding of pages to wire services
gives the ECB the opportunity to
disseminate market-sensitive informationin real time to financial market participants.Groups of visitors are received at the ECBon an almost daily basis throughout theyear. In this way visitors Œ of which there
were approximately 10,000 last year Œ
receive first-hand information on the ECBand its activities.Academic conferences are organised to helpstimulate interaction between economistsinterested in central banking issues.The rapidly increasing level of internet accessamong the population of the euro area hasgreatly facilitated the process of making

information available on demand. The ECB™swebsite (www.ecb.int) now plays a major rolein communication with the public. On the
website, all documents published by the ECBcan be viewed and downloaded. E-mail
hotlines are provided to deal with various
kinds of queries. Furthermore, the ECB™swebsite provides links to the websites of all
the EU NCBs, where many of the publications

are available in the respective languages.A substantial part of the demand for
information is already satisfied by means ofelectronic distribution, and the latter israpidly gaining in importance. This trend is152expected to continue. However, it will notreplace communication via the mass media,which serve as important intermediariesbetween the ECB and the general public.2The exchange of information and views with the European
Parliament2.1Relations between the ECB and the
European ParliamentDuring 2000 the members of the ExecutiveBoard of the ECB and the President in
particular continued their appearances beforethe European Parliament to report onmonetary policy and other activities of the

ESCB. These regular appearances are based
on Article 113 (3) of the Treaty, whichrequires the ECB to address an annual report

on the activities of the ESCB and on themonetary policy of both the previous yearand the current year to the EuropeanParliament, the EU Council, the Commission
and the European Council. This report is
presented by the President of the ECB to theEuropean Parliament, which may hold ageneral debate on that basis. Moreover, the
President of the ECB and the other membersof the Executive Board may, at the request of
the European Parliament or on their own
initiative, be heard by the competentcommittees of the European Parliament.The regular appearances of the President and
other members of the Executive Board beforethe European Parliament are an essential tool
Box 13Public appearances of ECB representatives before the European Parliament in 2000
On 5 July 2000, the President presented the ECB™s Annual Report 1999 at the European Parliament™s plenarysession.The following appearances by ECB representatives took place before the Committee on Economic andMonetary Affairs:quarterly exchanges of views with the President (20 March, 20 June, 12 September, 23 November);
exchange of views with Mr. Issing on the Commission™s report entitled ﬁEU Economy Œ 1999 Review
ﬂ(10 January);presentation of the ECB Recommendation for a Council regulation concerning further calls of foreign
reserve assets by the ECB (27 January);presentation of the ECB™s views on the Commission proposal for a European Parliament and CouncilDirective on the taking up, the pursuit and the prudential supervision of the business of electronic money
institutions (28 February);presentation of the ECB™s Annual Report 1999 by the Vice-President (17 April);presentation of the ECB™s Convergence Report 2000 by the Vice-President (3 May);exchange of views with Mr. Domingo Solans on the Euro 2002 Information Campaign on euro banknotesand coins (5 June).153to provide the European public and itsdirectly elected representatives with detailed
explanations regarding the fulfilment of the
Treaty mandate.In line with agreed practice, the President ofthe ECB appeared before the Committeeon Economic and Monetary Affairs of the
European Parliament each quarter. The focus
of these appearances was on monetary policyand economic developments, in particular onthe factors potentially affecting price stability.
The President reported on the decisionstaken by the Governing Council in the areaof monetary policy as well as within other
fields of ESCB competence, and explainedthe analysis underpinning these decisions indetail.In addition, members of the Executive Boardof the ECB appeared before the Committee
on Economic and Monetary Affairs on anumber of other occasions. The Vice-President presented the Annual Report 1999
and the Convergence Report 2000 coveringGreece and Sweden. Other members of theExecutive Board appeared before the
Committee to provide information on thepreparation of the Euro 2002 InformationCampaign and to present the ECB™s views on
the 1999 review of the EU economy by theCommission. Finally, the ECB participated atan expert level in meetings of the Committee
to present the ECB Recommendation for aCouncil Regulation concerning further calls
of foreign reserve assets by the ECB and to
explain the ECB™s concerns on draftsecondary legislation regarding electronicmoney institutions. Box 13 provides an
overview of the public appearances of ECBrepresentatives before the EuropeanParliament in 2000.In addition to these public appearances, anumber of contacts between the ECB and the
European Parliament took place outside theformal setting of official parliamentary meetings.In particular, a delegation of members of the

Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairsvisited the ECB on 23 October 2000 toexchange views with the Executive Board.2.2Views of the ECB on selected topics
raised at meetings with theEuropean ParliamentIn the course of the various exchanges of
views between the ECB and the European
Parliament within the scope of theCommittee on Economic and MonetaryAffairs, a range of issues has been addressed.
The following sections provide an overviewof the discussions on some key topics.The contribution of the single monetarypolicy to the general economic policies in
the CommunityArticle 105 of the Treaty stipulates that
without prejudice to the objective of pricestability, the ESCB shall support the generaleconomic policies in the Community. Against

this background, one of the main topics raisedin the exchanges of views between the ECB
and the European Parliament was how the

single monetary policy could best contribute
to the general economic policy objectives ofthe Community, such as sustainable and
non-inflationary growth and a high levelof employment.In this respect, the President of the ECBrecalled that the best contribution ofmonetary policy to growth and employment
objectives was to provide economic agents
with the well-founded expectation thatfuture economic developments would be
characterised by price stability. A climate ofprice stability would allow businesses andconsumers to take investment and spending
decisions undistorted by inflation or deflation.Indeed, price stability contributes to a moreefficient allocation of resources within the

economy and creates conditions conduciveto growth and employment.
Therefore, the focus of the single monetarypolicy is Œ and has to remain Œ on the
maintenance of price stability, which is the

primary task assigned to the Eurosystem bythe Treaty. The need to focus on pricestability has also been explicitly recalled in154the European Parliament™s resolution on theECB™s Annual Report 1999, which states thatﬁthe ECB™s contribution to promoting growth
and employment lies primarily in adoptingcredible and lasting measures to ensure pricestabilityﬂ (recital H).External value of the euroBroad attention was also given to the externalvalue of the euro, the ECB™s assessment of
the reasons underlying the developments ofthe euro exchange rate and the issue ofappropriate policy responses.The President explained that developmentsin the external value of the euro were
regularly and carefully analysed by theGoverning Council in particular as to theirpotential impact on price stability within the
euro area. The Eurosystem shared theconcerns that the euro exchange rate did notreflect the robust economic fundamentals of
the euro area. He also stressed that availableeconomic indicators would suggest that theeuro had a strong potential to appreciate.In this context, the President evoked theconclusions reached by euro area
governments in the framework of theEurogroup, in particular the need to speedup the process of fiscal consolidation and to
promote structural reforms with a view toincreasing the growth potential of the euroarea. The importance of structural reforms is

also underscored by the EuropeanParliament™s resolution on the ECB™s AnnualReport 1999 (paragraph 11).Euro area cross-border retail paymentservicesIn September 1999, the Eurosystem launched
an initiative aimed at improving cross-borderretail payment services within the euro areaand defined seven main policy objectives,
which the European banking industry isexpected to fulfil by the beginning of 2002.
The European Parliament expressed greatinterest in this initiative as well as in the firstfollow-up report, which was published by theECB in September 2000.During the exchanges of views with theCommittee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs, the President recalled the rationalebehind the Eurosystem™s initiative, namely thatthe fees charged for cross-border retail
payment transactions in the euro area and
the execution time for such transactionsshould be similar to those of domestic retail
payments. The President also reported onthe contacts that the ECB had establishedwith the European banking industry with a
view to exploring practical ways and meansof enhancing the efficiency of cross-borderretail payment systems.In presenting the main findings of the progressreport to the Committee, the President
pointed out that most of the objectivesdefined by the Eurosystem had not yet beenfulfilled, but that substantial progress had
been made in preparing the ground for amore efficient handling of cross-border retailpayments. The Eurosystem would continue
to closely monitor developments in cross-border retail payment services in order toensure that the preparations currently under
way would ultimately translate into adequateservices for European citizens.More detailed information on theEurosystem™s initiative to improve cross-border retail payment services and the

progress report published in this context isprovided in Chapter VI.The Euro 2002 Information CampaignAnother focal issue pertained to the need toadequately prepare European citizens for theintroduction of euro banknotes and coins
on 1 January 2002. In this respect, theCommittee on Economic and MonetaryAffairs expressed interest in more detailed

information on the Euro 2002 InformationCampaign, which is conducted by theEurosystem. Upon invitation by the155Committee, a member of the Executive Boardpresented the main features of theinformation campaign to the Committee.During the discussion, Committee membersattached great importance to an efficient
co-ordination of the different informationcampaigns prepared and conducted at the
European and national levels. Moreover, due
attention should be paid to the properinformation of vulnerable groups such as theblind and partially sighted.The ECB pointed out that the Euro 2002Information Campaign would be co-ordinated
with all relevant institutions at the Europeanand national levels so as to avoidcontradicting and confusing messages as well
as a duplication of messages and informationgaps. Indeed, the ECB closely co-ordinatesits information activities with the European
Commission and the European Parliament.The main platform for the co-ordination ofthe communication strategies are the
quarterly meetings of the National Directors
of Communication on the Euro, which areattended by representatives of the ECB, the
European Commission and the MemberStates. Moreover, a representative from theEuropean Commission is taking part in the

Eurosystem™s working group for the Euro2002 Information Campaign. Furthermore,
the ECB is engaged in a process of

co-operation with organisations representingvulnerable groups, such as the European BlindUnion, in the context of the ﬁEuro made
easyﬂ project. More detailed information onthe Euro 2002 Information Campaign can befound in Chapter VIII, Section 4.The ECB Recommendation for a CouncilRegulation concerning further calls offoreign reserve assets by the ECBBased on the relevant Treaty provisions (inparticular Article 107 (6) of the Treaty and
Article 30.4 of the Statute of the ESCB), theECB presented a Recommendation for aCouncil Regulation regarding the transfer of
foreign reserve assets by the national centralbanks of the Eurosystem to the ECB beyondthe initial amount of 50 billion. As stipulated
by the Treaty, the European Parliament wasconsulted in this procedure. In the course ofthe consultation process, ECB experts
attended a meeting of the Committee onEconomic and Monetary Affairs to presentthe Recommendation and to answer any
questions by the Committee in this regard.
The ECB pointed out that theRecommendation for such a CouncilRegulation was required by the Treaty and
was not intended to actually increase foreign
reserves at the current juncture. It was alsoemphasised that the ECB would make use ofsuch a provision only to replenish its holdings
of foreign reserves up to the initial amount.The Recommendation presented by the ECBmet with clear support by the Committee.The Committee underlined that the ECBneeded to have the possibility to draw on
foreign reserves held by the NCBs of theEurosystem. The ECB Recommendationsubsequently met with the approval of the
European Parliament at its plenary session.Acad”mie duWesthoek,Koksijde,Belgium
Designed by Chantal Grard.Title:Euro 2000 Ð Unity
Chapter XIIThe institutional frameworkof the Eurosystemand the European Systemof Central Banks1581The Eurosystem and the European System of Central Banks
The European System of Central Banks(ESCB) is composed of the European CentralBank (ECB) and the national central banks
(NCBs) of all 15 EU Member States, i.e. it
includes the three NCBs of the MemberStates which have not yet adopted the euro.(See Chapter III on the entry of Greece into
the euro area.) In order to enhancetransparency and facilitate understanding of
the structure of central banking in the EU,

the term ﬁEurosystemﬂ has been adopted by
the Governing Council of the ECB. TheEurosystem comprises the ECB and the NCBs
of the Member States which have adoptedthe euro (participating Member States). Aslong as there are Member States which have
not yet adopted the euro, it will be necessaryto make a distinction between the
Eurosystem and the ESCB.
The ECB has legal personality under publicinternational law. It has been established as
the core of the Eurosystem and ensures that
the tasks of the Eurosystem are carried outeither through its own activities or via theNCBs. In taking its decisions on the way in
which the tasks should be carried out, theECB is committed to the principle ofdecentralisation in accordance with the
Statute of the ESCB.Each of the NCBs has legal personalityaccording to the national law of its respectivecountry. Despite having separate legalpersonality, the euro area NCBs form an
integral part of the Eurosystem. As such,
NCBs carry out the tasks conferred uponthe Eurosystem in accordance with the
rules established by the ECB. Inter alia,through the participation of their respective
representatives in the various ESCB
Committees (see Section 4 below), the NCBsalso contribute to the work of the ESCB. TheNCBs may perform non-Eurosystem functions
EURO
SYSTEM
EUROPEAN SYSTEMOFCENTRALBANKS (ESCB)
European Central Bank (ECB)
Governing 
CouncilExecutive 
Board
Governing 
CouncilExecutive 
Board
General CouncilGeneral CouncilEuropean Central Bank (ECB)
DanmarksNationalbankSveriges Riksbank
Bank of England
Nationale Bank van Belgi‚/Banque Nationale de BelgiqueDeutsche Bundesbank
Bank of Greece

Banco de EspanøaBanque de France

Central Bank of Ireland
DanmarksNationalbankSveriges Riksbank
Bank of England
Nationale Bank van Belgi‚/Banque Nationale de BelgiqueDeutsche Bundesbank
Bank of Greece

Banco de EspanøaBanque de France

Central Bank of Ireland
Banca dÕItaliaBanque centrale duLuxembourg
De Nederlandsche Bank
Oesterreichische Nationalbank

Banco de Portugal

Suomen Pankki
Banca dÕItaliaBanque centrale duLuxembourg
De Nederlandsche Bank
Oesterreichische Nationalbank

Banco de Portugal

Suomen Pankki
159on their own responsibility, unless theGoverning Council finds that such functionsinterfere with the objectives and tasks of theEurosystem.2The decision-making bodies of the ECB
The Eurosystem and the ESCB are governed
by the decision-making bodies of the ECB:the Governing Council and the Executive
Board. Without prejudice to this, the GeneralCouncil is constituted as a third decision-
making body of the ECB, if and for as long as
there are Member States which have not yet
adopted the euro as their currency. Thefunctioning of the decision-making bodies is
governed by the Treaty establishing theEuropean Community (Treaty), the Statuteof the ESCB and the relevant Rules of

Procedure.1 While decisions relating to the
objectives and tasks of the Eurosystem/ESCB
are taken centrally, operations in the euro
area are decentralised and are carried out bythe NCBs to the extent deemed appropriateand possible.2.1The Governing Council
The Governing Council, which is the supremedecision-making body of the ECB, comprises
all the members of the Executive Boardand the governors of the NCBs of theMember States which have adopted the
euro. According to the Treaty, the mainresponsibilities of the Governing Council are:to adopt the guidelines and take the
decisions necessary to ensure theperformance of the tasks entrusted to the

ESCB; and
to formulate the monetary policy of the
euro area, including, as appropriate,decisions relating to intermediate
monetary objectives, key interest rates andthe supply of reserves in the Eurosystem,and to establish the necessary guidelines
for their implementation.When taking decisions on monetary policyand on other tasks of the Eurosystem, themembers of the Governing Council do notact as national representatives, but in a fully
independent personal capacity. This isreflected in the principle of ﬁone member,one voteﬂ.In 2000 the Governing Council met, as a rule,every other week at the ECB™s premises in
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. However, threeof these meetings were held by means ofteleconferencing. Moreover, in line with the

decision taken earlier that the GoverningCouncil would meet twice a year in anothereuro area country, one meeting was hosted
by the Banco de España in Madrid and one bythe Banque de France in Paris.
1The Rules of Procedure have been published in the Official
Journal of the European Communities, see Rules of Procedure of
the European Central Bank, OJ L 125, 19.5.1999, p. 34 and
L 314, 8.12.99, p. 32; Rules of Procedure of the General Council
of the ECB, OJ L 75, 20.3.1999, p. 36 and L 156, 23.6.1999,

p. 52; Decision of the European Central Bank of 12 October
1999 concerning the Rules of Procedure of the Executive Board
of the European Central Bank (ECB/1999/7), OJ L 314,
8.12.1999, p. 34. With the exception of the latter, they have
been reproduced in the ECB™s first legal yearbook ﬁCompendium:
Collection of legal instruments, June 1998 Œ May 1999ﬂ, October
1999.160Willem F. Duisenberg
President of the ECBChristian NoyerVice-President of the ECBJaime Caruana (as from 12 July 2000)Governor of the Banco de EspañaVítor ConstâncioGovernor of the Banco de Portugal      (as from 23 February 2000)
Eugenio Domingo SolansMember of the Executive Board of the ECBAntonio FazioGovernor of the Banca d™ItaliaSirkka HämäläinenMember of the Executive Board of the ECBOtmar IssingMember of the Executive Board of the ECBKlaus LiebscherGovernor of the Oesterreichische NationalbankYves MerschGovernor of the Banque centrale du LuxembourgMaurice O™ConnellGovernor of the Central Bank of IrelandTommaso Padoa-SchioppaMember of the Executive Board of the ECBLucas D. Papademos2Governor of the Bank of GreeceGuy QuadenGovernor of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de BelgiqueLuis Ángel Rojo (until 11 July 2000)Governor of the Banco de EspañaAntónio José Fernandes de SousaGovernor of the Banco de Portugal      (until 22 February 2000)

Jean-Claude TrichetGovernor of the Banque de FranceMatti VanhalaGovernor of Suomen PankkiNout WellinkPresident of De Nederlandsche BankErnst WeltekePresident of the Deutsche BundesbankThe Governing CouncilBack row (left to right): Yves Mersch, Lucas D. Papademos, J. Caruana, Antonio Fazio, Matti Vanhala, Guy Quaden, Ernst Welteke,Nout Wellink, Jean-Claude Trichet, Maurice O™Connell, Klaus Liebscher, Vítor Constâncio Front row (left to right): Otmar Issing, Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Christian Noyer, Willem F. Duisenberg, Sirkka Hämäläinen,
Eugenio Domingo Solans2The Governor of the Bank of Greece attended all the meetings of the Governing Council of the ECB in the second half of 2000 as
 a ﬁspecial
inviteeﬂ following the decision taken by the EU Council on 19 June 2000 to abrogate Greece™s derogation with effect from 1 January 2001.1612.2The Executive Board
The Executive Board comprises the President,the Vice-President and four other members,appointed by common accord of thegovernments of the participating Member
States at the level of the Heads of State orGovernment. The main responsibilities of theExecutive Board are:to prepare the meetings of the Governing
Council;to implement monetary policy inaccordance with the guidelines anddecisions laid down by the GoverningCouncil and, in doing so, to give thenecessary instructions to the EurosystemNCBs;to be responsible for the current businessof the ECB; andto assume certain powers delegated to itby the Governing Council, including certainones of a regulatory nature.Current practice is for the Executive Boardto meet at least once a week in order todecide on the implementation of the
monetary policy, the preparation of themeetings of the Governing Council andinternal ECB matters.Willem F. Duisenberg
President of the ECBChristian NoyerVice-President of the ECBEugenio Domingo SolansMember of the Executive Board of the ECBSirkka HämäläinenMember of the Executive Board of the ECBOtmar IssingMember of the Executive Board of the ECBTommaso Padoa-SchioppaMember of the Executive Board of the ECBBack row (left to right): Eugenio Domingo Solans, Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Otmar IssingFront row: Christian Noyer, Willem F. Duisenberg,  Sirkka Hämäläinen
1622.3The General Council
The General Council is composed of the
President and the Vice-President of the ECB
and the governors of all 15 NCBs, i.e. of bothparticipating and non-participating Member
States. It carries out those tasks taken overfrom the European Monetary Institute which,on account of the fact that the Member States
have not all adopted the euro, still have to beperformed by the ECB in Stage Three of EMU.Therefore, the General Council is primarily
responsible for reporting on the progressmade towards convergence by the non-participating Member States3 and for giving
advice on the necessary preparations forirrevocably fixing the exchange rates of the
currencies of those Member States (see
Chapter IV). Moreover, the General Council
contributes to particular activities of the
ESCB, such as advisory functions (seeChapter X) and the collection of statistical
information (see Chapter IX). In 2000 the
General Council met five times in Frankfurtam Main.3In accordance with the Protocol on certain provisions relating to
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the Protocol on certain provisions relating to Denmark, both of
which are annexed to the Treaty, this reporting shall be carried
out for the United Kingdom and Denmark only if they decide to
apply to adopt the euro.163Willem F. Duisenberg
President of the ECBChristian NoyerVice-President of the ECBBodil Nyboe AndersenGovernor of Danmarks NationalbankUrban BäckströmGovernor of Sveriges RiksbankJaime Caruana (as from 12 July 2000)Governor of the Banco de EspañaVítor Constâncio       (as from 23 February 2000)
Governor of the Banco de PortugalAntonio FazioGovernor of the Banca d™ItaliaEdward A. J. GeorgeGovernor of the Bank of EnglandKlaus LiebscherGovernor of the Oesterreichische NationalbankYves MerschGovernor of the Banque centrale du LuxembourgMaurice O™ConnellGovernor of the Central Bank of IrelandLucas D. PapademosGovernor of the Bank of GreeceGuy QuadenGovernor of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de BelgiqueLuis Ángel Rojo (until 11 July 2000)Governor of the Banco de EspañaAntónio José Fernandes de Sousa       (until 22 February 2000)
Governor of the Banco de PortugalJean-Claude TrichetGovernor of the Banque de FranceMatti VanhalaGovernor of Suomen PankkiNout WellinkPresident of De Nederlandsche BankErnst WeltekePresident of the Deutsche BundesbankThe General CouncilBack row (left to right): Klaus Liebscher, Guy Quaden, Antonio Fazio, Matti Vanhala, Lucas D. Papademos, Urban Bäckström,Ernst Welteke, Nout Wellink, Edward A. J. George, Maurice O™Connell, Jean-Claude TrichetFront row (left to right): J. Caruana, Yves Mersch, Christian Noyer, Willem F. Duisenberg, Bodil Nyboe Andersen, Vítor Constâncio1643The organisation of the ECB
3.1Corporate governance
In addition to the decision-making bodies of theECB described in the previous sections, the
corporate governance of the ECB alsoencompasses a number of external and internalcontrol layers. The Statute of the ESCB
(Article 27) provides for two layers, namely theexternal auditors and the European Court ofAuditors.4 More recently, an independent Anti-
Fraud Committee was established as anadditional control layer. Moreover, theDirectorate Internal Audit, which reports
directly to the President of the ECB,continuously performs audit missions under amandate from the Executive Board.The internal control structure of the ECB isbased on a functional approach, whereby each
organisational unit (Division, Directorate or
Directorate General) is responsible for itsown internal control and efficiency. In order
to ensure this, the business units implementa set of operational control procedures withintheir area of responsibility. In addition to
these controls, certain organisational unitsadvise and make proposals to the ExecutiveBoard on specific control issues on a
horizontal basis (e.g. Directorate Controllingand Organisation and the Middle OfficeDivision).The mandate of the Directorate Internal
Audit is defined in the ECB-Audit Charter.
The ECB-Audit Charter was established onthe basis of professional standards which
apply internationally.5 The ESCB audit policy
was established by the Governing Council inorder to ensure audit coverage for jointprojects and joint operational systems at the
ESCB level.In October the Executive Board approvedthe Code of Conduct of the European Central
Bank.6 The Code of Conduct gives guidance
to, and sets benchmarks for, the staff of the
ECB and the members of the ExecutiveBoard, all of whom are encouraged tomaintain high standards of professional ethicsin the performance of their duties at the ECBas well as in their relations with NCBs, publicauthorities, market participants, mediarepresentatives and the public in general. In
this respect, it echoes the inquiry conductedat the European Ombudsman™s own initiativeinto a code of good administrative behaviour
for Community officials in their relations withthe public.The Executive Board also adopted a set ofinternal controls, including detailed rulespreventing the abuse of sensitive financial

market information (ﬁinsider trading rulesﬂand ﬁChinese wallsﬂ). The staff of the ECBand the members of the Executive Board are
thereby prohibited from taking advantage,
whether directly or indirectly, of insideinformation to which they have access by
conducting private financial activities at theirown risk and for their own account, or at the
risk and for the account of a third party. The
Conditions of Employment for Staff of the
European Central Bank were amendedaccordingly.7The budgetary authority of the ECB is vested
in the Governing Council, which adopts the
budget of the ECB, acting on a proposal put
forward by the Executive Board. In addition,the Budget Committee assists the Governing
Council in matters related to the ECB™sbudget.In order to join the efforts of the institutionsof the European Communities and the4The competencies of the European Court of Auditors cover the
examination of the operational efficiency of the management of
the ECB (Article 27.2 of the Statute of the ESCB).5The principles and standards of the relevant professional
institutes, such as the Institute for Internal Auditors (IIA) and the
Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA).6See the Code of Conduct of the European Central Bank in
accordance with Article 11.3 of the Rules of Procedure of the
European Central Bank, OJ C 76, 8.3.2001, p.12 and the ECB™s
website.7See Part 1.2 of the ECB Staff Rules containing the rules on
professional conduct and professional secrecy, OJ C 76, 8.3.2001,
p.15.1658See the Decision of the European Central Bank of 7 October
1999 on fraud prevention (ECB/1999/5), OJ L 291, 13.11.1999,
p. 36. In connection with this, the Rules of Procedure of the
European Central Bank were amended by a new Article 9a, see
OJ L 314, 8.12.1999, p. 32.Member States to combat fraud and otherillegal activities, the originally existing layersof control within the ECB were enhanced
by the establishment of the Anti-Fraud
Committee on the basis of the ECB Decisionon fraud prevention (ECB/1999/5).8 The
Committee took up its responsibilities at thebeginning of the reporting year and appointedJohn L. Murray as chairperson. The Anti-Fraud
Committee, which held three meetings duringthe year, is regularly kept informed by theDirectorate Internal Audit about all issues
related to the performance of its tasks. Inparticular, the Committee followed theestablishment of internal procedures for the
prevention of fraud at the ECB. In its firstannual report, the Anti-Fraud Committeeconcluded that it had detected no occurrence

of fraud or other illegal activities detrimentalto the financial interests of the ECB.
3.2Human resources management
StaffingAt the end of 2000 the number of staff
employed by the ECB from all 15 MemberStates stood at 941. This compares with 732staff at the end of 1999. On 30 November

2000 the Governing Council approved theECB™s budget for 2001, which envisagesbringing the ECB™s staff to slightly over 1,100
in the course of the year. As a consequence,the Executive Board decided on a number oforganisational adjustments aimed at

reinforcing the ECB™s managerial structure,which are reflected in the revisedorganisational chart of the ECB which took
effect as from 4 January 2000 and was furtheradjusted with effect from 5 December 2000.As part of its recruitment effort the
ECB offered relocation services, temporary
accommodation, a job-finding programme forspouses and language training for new staff
and their spouses.Human resources management policiesWork progressed on the codification of therules for recruitment. A draft is currentlyunder consideration by the Staff Committeeand a final version is expected in early 2001.
The rules aim to ensure that recruitmentand promotion are based upon the principlesof professional qualification, publicity,
transparency, equal access and non-discrimination and to establish fair and equalpractices for recruitment procedures.The Executive Board approved a proposal toestablish the function of a Staff Counsellor
and Equal Opportunities Adviser. As an
independent external expert the Adviser willreview the situation with regard to equal

opportunities at the ECB and providerecommendations on policy measures. Theexpertise and independent status of such an
adviser will be conducive to timelyrecommendations with a high level ofcredibility. The role of such an external
consultant may go beyond the issue of genderto other areas of equal opportunities(e.g. disability issues and non-gender-related
discrimination). In addition, the Adviser canact as an impartial ﬁsounding boardﬂ insituations of (potential) conflict at work and
as a mediator, assisting the parties in reachinga mutually acceptable outcome.The ECB™s childcare facility and the
European SchoolThe ECB™s childcare facility opened its doorsat its provisional premises for 30 children.
The definitive premises should becomeavailable in mid-2001, aiming to accommodateapproximately 70 children from the age of
three months until they enter primary school.166The Board of Governors of the EuropeanSchools approved the application submittedby the Federal Republic of Germany to
establish a European School in Frankfurt. Thisproject had been actively pursued by the ECB.The location for the school has been decided
and building plans are being drawn up. Theaim is to open the school by the 2002/03
school year.PensionsThe system for the governance of the ECB
Retirement Plan was completed with the
establishment of the Oversight Committeeand the Investment Committees. TheOversight Committee, the members of
which are elected by the beneficiaries,represents the interests of the beneficiariesby monitoring the overall running of
the Retirement Plan. The Investment
Committees, some members of which areelected by the staff and some appointed by

the Governing Council, advise on theinvestment strategy of the ECB™s and the
staff™s funds forming the assets of the
Retirement Plan and monitor theperformance of the investment manager.An agreement on the transfer of pensionrights to the Retirement Plan has beenreached with Luxembourg and the
Netherlands. Agreements with other EUcountries have been and will continue to beactively pursued.Staff relationsIn June a new Staff Committee, which wasextended from seven to nine members, was
elected. The Spokesperson and two DeputySpokespersons of the Staff Committee arereleased from their normal duties by 50%
and the other members by 20%. Where these
fall within the scope of its competence, theStaff Committee is consulted on changes to
the Conditions of Employment and to theStaff Rules, and on related matters.At their own initiative, members of staff havecreated an in-house trade union, the Unionof the Staff of the European Central Bank

(USE). On a voluntary basis the ECB has
established an institutional dialogue at thehighest management level with USE.
However, the ECB has rejected its request
to be recognised as a social partner for thepurpose of concluding collective agreements.
USE, together with an external trade union,has submitted the issue to the European
Court of First Instance.1673.3The organisational chart of the ECB
ECB Executive BoardPresident Willem F. DuisenbergDirectorateExternal RelationsManfred J. KırberDirectorateSecretariat andLanguage ServicesFrank Moss DirectorateInternal Audit*Mich‘le CaparelloCounsel to theExecutive BoardCo-ordinator:Olaf SleijpenDivisionOfficial Publications,Archives and LibraryDivisionSecretariatDivisionPressDivision Language ServicesDivision ESCB AuditDivision ECB AuditDivisionProtocol and ConferencesECB Executive BoardVice-President Christian NoyerDirectorateInternal FinanceIan IngramDirectoratePersonnelBerend van BaakDivisionFinancial LawDivisionDivisionAccountingDivisionFinancial Reportingand PolicyDivisionPremisesPersonnelDevelopmentDivisionPersonnel PolicyDirectorate GeneralAdministration and PersonnelHanspeter K. SchellerDirectorate GeneralLegal ServicesAntonio S⁄inz de VicuŒaDivisionInstitutional LawDivisionMiddle OfficeECB Executive BoardEugenio Domingo SolansDivisionBalance of PaymentsStatistics and ExternalReservesDivisionIT BusinessDevelopmentDivisionIT Operations andCustomer ServiceDirectorate GeneralInformation SystemsJim EtheringtonDeputy: Christian BoerschDirectorate GeneralStatisticsPeter BullDivisionGeneral Economic andFinancial StatisticsDivisionMoney and BankingStatisticsDirectorateControllingand OrganisationKlaus GressenbauerDivisionDivisionPortfolioManagement SystemsDivisionOwn FundsManagement Back OfficeDivisionDivisionBudget and ProjectsDivisionOrganisational PlanningFront OfficeDivisionOperations AnalysisDirectorate General Operations Francesco PapadiaDeputies: Paul Mercier, Werner StudenerDirectorateBanknotesAntti HeinonenDivision Banknote PrintingDivision Banknote IssueECB Executive BoardOtmar IssingDirectorate GeneralResearchV™tor GasparDeputy:Ignazio AngeloniDivisionEconometricModellingDivisionGeneral EconomicResearchECB Executive BoardTommaso Padoa-SchioppaDivisionPayment SystemsPolicyDivisionInternational RelationsDivisionEuropean RelationsDivisionBilateral RelationsDirectorate GeneralInternational andEuropean RelationsPierre van der HaegenDeputy: Georges PineauDivisionTARGET and PaymentProcessingDivisionSecurities SettlementSystems PolicyDirectorate GeneralPayment SystemsJean-Michel GodeffroyDeputy: N. N.DivisionPrudential SupervisionDivisionIT Infrastructureand Systems SupportDivisionIS SecurityDivisionIT Planning andMajor ProjectsDivisionDedicated IT Application SupportDivisionOffice Services and SecurityDivisionStatistical Information SystemsDirectorateMonetary PolicyHans-Joachim KlıckersDirectorateEconomic DevelopmentsWolfgang SchillDivision Monetary PolicyStrategyDivision Euro Area MacroeconomicDevelopmentsDivision Monetary Policy StanceDivisionEU CountriesDivision Capital Markets andFinancial StructureDivision ExternalDevelopmentsECB PermanentRepresentation inWashington, D.C.Gerald GrisseECB Executive BoardSirkka H−m−l−inenDirectorate General EconomicsGert Jan HogewegDeputies: Philippe Moutot, Wolfgang SchillDivision Fiscal Policies*Within the Directorate Internal Audit an Anti-Fraud Unit has been set up, which will report via the Director Internal Audit
to the Anti-Fraud Committee established pursuant to the Decision of the European Central Bank on fraud prevention
(ECB/1999/5) of  7 October 1999.
1684ESCB Committees
The ESCB Committees have continued to playan important role in the performance of the
tasks of the Eurosystem/ESCB. At the requestof both the Governing Council and the
Executive Board, they have providedexpertise in their fields of competence andhave facilitated the decision-making process.
The ESCB Committees are composed ofrepresentatives of the Eurosystem centralbanks and, where appropriate, of other
competent bodies, such as national
supervisory authorities in the case of the
Banking Supervision Committee. The NCBsof the non-participating Member States haveeach also appointed a representative to take
part in the meetings of an ESCB Committee
whenever it deals with matters which fallwithin the field of competence of the General
Council. At present there are 12 ESCB
Committees, all of which were establishedunder Article 9 of the Rules of Procedure of
the ECB.ESCB Committees and their chairpersonsStatistics Committee(STC)Peter BullPayment and Settlement Systems Committee(PSSC)Jean-Michel GodeffroyMonetary Policy Committee(MPC)Gert Jan HogewegMarket Operations Committee(MOC)Francesco Papadia
Legal Committee(LEGCO)Antonio Sáinz de VicuñaInternational Relations Committee(IRC)Hervé HannounInternal Auditors Committee(IAC)Michèle CaparelloInformation Technology Committee(ITC)Jim EtheringtonExternal Communications Committee(ECCO)Manfred J. KörberBanknote Committee(BANCO)Antti HeinonenBanking Supervision Committee(BSC)Edgar MeisterAccounting and Monetary Income Committee(AMICO)Hanspeter K. SchellerIn addition to the ESCB Committees, the
Budget Committee has been established bythe Governing Council on the basis of
Article 15 of the Rules of Procedure of theECB. It is composed of representatives of theEurosystem central banks and is chaired by
Mr. Liam Barron. It assists the Governing
Council in matters related to the ECB™s
budget.169Kinderkrebsstation der Klinik Innsbruck,Austria
Designed by Marie Luise Klimbacher.Untitled
Annual Accountsof the ECBand Consolidated Balance Sheetof the Eurosystem2000Chapter XIII172Balance Sheet as at 31 December 2000AssetsNote20001999
number1Gold and gold receivables17,040,906,5656,956,995,273

2Claims on non-euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency2
Balances with banks and security investments,external loans and other external assets37,475,047,82941,923,041,208
3Claims on euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency23,824,522,5712,595,090,860
4Claims on non-euro area residents
denominated in euro3
Balances with banks, security
investments and loans698,252,4633,002,567,659
5Other claims on euro area credit institutions
denominated in euro3288,143,000565,724,243
6Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro43,667,731,1943,537,141,285
7Intra-Eurosystem claims5
Other claims within the Eurosystem (net)13,080,794,0170
8Other assets
8.1Tangible and intangible fixed assets
6.164,168,17842,589,467
8.2Other financial assets
6.281,758,34176,083,163
8.3Off-balance-sheet instrument
revaluation differences6.3251,564,4710
8.4Accruals and deferred expenditure
6.4862,316,142777,032,332
8.5Sundry items
6.53,747,4846,774,149
1,263,554,616902,479,111
9Loss for the year0247,281,223
Total assets67,338,952,25559,730,320,862
Memorandum item
Forward claims denominated in euro2,885,697,468173LiabilitiesNote20001999
number1Liabilities to euro area credit institutions
denominated in euro7288,143,000265,724,244
2Liabilities to other euro area residents
denominated in euro81,080,000,0001,080,000,000
3Liabilities to non-euro area residents
denominated in euro93,421,112,123301,656,911
4Liabilities to non-euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency10
Deposits, balances and other liabilities4,803,381,2554,708,950,946
5Intra-Eurosystem liabilities
5.1Liabilities equivalent to the transfer
of foreign reserves
1139,468,950,00039,468,950,000
5.2Other liabilities within the
Eurosystem (net)
501,720,937,646
39,468,950,00041,189,887,646
6Other liabilities12
6.1Accruals and deferred income1,626,022,2281,237,727,166

6.2Sundry items52,005,65036,881,237
1,678,027,8781,274,608,403
7Provisions132,637,039,13521,862,239
8Revaluation accounts147,972,626,8646,860,539,710

9Capital and reserves15
9.1Capital3,999,550,2503,999,550,250

9.2Reserves027,540,513
3,999,550,2504,027,090,763
10Profit for the year1,990,121,7500
Total liabilities67,338,952,25559,730,320,862
Memorandum item
Forward liabilities denominated2,885,697,468in foreign currency174Profit and Loss Account for the year ending 31 December 2000Note20001999
numberInterest income on foreign reserve assets2,507,164,8921,733,987,854
Other interest income4,657,469,8673,122,690,418
1.1Interest income
7,164,634,7594,856,678,272
Remuneration of NCBs™ claims in respect
of foreign reserves transferred(1,375,110,826)(913,067,289)
Other interest expense(4,375,476,075)(2,988,344,639)
1.2Interest expense
(5,750,586,901)(3,901,411,928)
1Net interest income11,414,047,858955,266,344
2.1Realised gains/losses arising from
financial operations23,352,768,266(466,056,435)
2.2Write-downs on financial assets
and positions3(1,084,563)(604,920,383)
2.3Transfer to/from provisions for foreign
exchange rate and price risks(2,600,000,000)0
2Net result of financial operations,
write-downs and risk provisions751,683,703(1,070,976,818)
3Net income from fees and commissions4673,498232,200
4Other income5904,158436,898
Total net income2,167,309,217(115,041,376)

5Staff costs6 & 7(80,275,827)(61,022,091)
6Administrative expenses8(82,808,524)(60,748,855)
7Depreciation of tangible and intangiblefixed assets(14,103,116)(10,468,901)
Profit/(Loss) for the year1,990,121,750(247,281,223)
Frankfurt am Main, 13 March 2001EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANKWillem F. DuisenbergPresident1751The detailed accounting policies of the ECB are laid down in
a Decision of the Governing Council of the ECB of
12 December 2000 (ECB/2000/16), which has been
published in the Official Journal of the European Communities
(OJ L 33, 2.2.2001).Accounting policies1Form and presentation of the financial
statementsThe financial statements of the EuropeanCentral Bank (ECB) have been designed topresent fairly the financial position of the
ECB and the results of its operations. They
have been drawn up in accordance with thefollowing accounting policies, which theGoverning Council of the ECB considers to
be appropriate to the function of a central
bank. These policies are consistent with theprovisions of Article 26.4 of the Statute of
the ESCB, which require a standardised
approach to the rules governing theaccounting and reporting operations of the
Eurosystem.Accounting principlesThe following accounting principles have beenapplied:economic reality and transparency;prudence;recognition of post-balance-sheet events;materiality;the accruals principle;going concern;consistency and comparability.Basis of accountingThe accounts have been prepared on a historicalcost basis, modified to include market valuationof marketable securities, gold and all other
on-balance-sheet and off-balance-sheet assetsand liabilities denominated in foreign currency.Transactions in financial assets and liabilities are
reflected in the accounts on the basis of thedate on which they are settled.Gold, foreign currency assets andliabilitiesAssets and liabilities denominated in foreigncurrency are converted into euro at theexchange rate prevailing on the balance sheet
date. Income and expenses are convertedat the exchange rate prevailing at thetime of the transaction. The revaluation of
foreign exchange assets and liabilitiesis performed on a currency-by-currency
basis, including on-balance-sheet and
off-balance-sheet instruments.Revaluation to the market price for assetsand liabilities denominated in foreign
currency is treated separately from theexchange rate revaluation.No distinction is made between the price
and currency revaluation differences for gold.
Instead, a single gold valuation is accountedfor on the basis of the price in euro per fineounce of gold, which is derived from the

exchange rate of the euro against theUS dollar on 29 December 2000.SecuritiesAll marketable debt securities and similarassets are valued at the mid-market pricesprevailing at the balance sheet date. For
the year ending on 31 December 2000,mid-market prices on 29 December 2000were used. Non-marketable securities are
valued at cost.Repurchase agreementsRepurchase agreements are recorded inthe balance sheet as collateralised inwarddeposits. The balance sheet shows thedeposits and the value of the securities used
as collateral. Securities sold under this typeof agreement remain on the balance sheet of
the ECB and are treated as if they had176remained part of the portfolio from whichthey were sold. Agreements involvingsecurities denominated in foreign currency
have no effect on the average cost of the
currency position.Reverse repurchase agreements are recordedas collateralised loans on the assets side ofthe balance sheet, for the value of the
loan. Securities acquired under this type ofagreement are not revalued.Income recognitionIncome and expenses are recognised in theperiod in which they are earned or incurred.
Realised gains and losses are taken to theprofit and loss account. An average cost
method is used on a daily basis to calculate
the acquisition cost of individual items. In theevent of an unrealised loss on any item at theyear-end, the average cost of that item is
reduced in line with the end-of-year exchangerate and/or market price.Unrealised gains are not recognised asincome, but are transferred directly to arevaluation account.Unrealised losses are taken to the profit
and loss account if they exceed

previous revaluation gains registered inthe corresponding revaluation account.Unrealised losses in any one security or
currency or in gold are not netted againstunrealised gains in other securities orcurrencies.Premiums or discounts arising on purchasedsecurities are calculated and presented as
part of interest income and are amortised
over the remaining life of the assets.
Off-balance-sheet instrumentsCurrency instruments, namely foreign
exchange forward transactions, forward legs
of foreign exchange swaps and other currency
instruments involving an exchange of onecurrency for another at a future date, areincluded in the net foreign currency position
for the purpose of calculating foreignexchange gains and losses. Interest rateinstruments are revalued on an item-by-item
basis and treated in a similar manner to
securities. For foreign exchange swaps, the
forward position is revalued in conjunction
with the spot position. Consequently, no netvaluation differences arise since the currencyreceived and the obligation to return it are
both valued at the same market rate in euro.Profits and losses arising from off-balance-sheet instruments are recognised and treated
in a similar manner to the profits and lossesrelating to on-balance-sheet instruments.Post-balance-sheet eventsAssets and liabilities are adjusted for events
that occur between the annual balance sheetdate and the date on which the Governing
Council of the ECB approves the financialstatements if such events materially affectthe condition of assets and liabilities at the
balance sheet date.Intra-ESCB balancesIntra-ESCB transactions are cross-bordertransactions that occur between twoEU central banks. These transactions areprimarily processed via TARGET2, andgive rise to bilateral balances in accountsheld between each of the central banks(participating NCBs, non-participating NCBs
and the ECB) in or connected to TARGET.With effect from 30 November 2000, all
TARGET-related bilateral claims and liabilitiesbetween the EU NCBs and the ECB are
netted daily at close of business by novating
them to the ECB, leaving each NCB with asingle net bilateral position vis-à-vis the ECBonly. This position in the books of the ECB2TARGET is the Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross
settlement Express Transfer system (see also Chapter II).177represents the net claim or liability of each
NCB against the rest of the ESCB.Intra-ESCB balances of the participatingNCBs with the ECB (except for the capital ofthe ECB and positions resulting from the

transfer of foreign reserve assets to the ECB)
are described as intra-Eurosystem claims orliabilities and are presented in the Balance
Sheet of the ECB as a single net asset orliability position.Treatment of tangible and intangiblefixed assetsTangible and intangible fixed assets are valuedat cost less depreciation. Depreciation is
calculated on a straight-line basis, beginningin the quarter after acquisition and continuingover the expected economic lifetime of the
asset, namely:Computers, related hardware and

software, and motor vehicles: four years;
Equipment, furniture and plant in building:
ten years.Fixed assets costing less than 10,000 arewritten off in the year of purchase.ECB™s retirement plan
The ECB operates a defined contributionpension scheme. The assets of the plan, which
exist solely for the purpose of providing benefits
for members of the plan and their dependants,are included in the other assets of the ECB andare identified separately. Valuation gains andlosses arising on the assets of the pension fund
are recognised as income and expenditure ofthe retirement plan in the year in which theyarise. The benefits payable from the core benefit
account, resulting from the contributions of theECB, have minimum guarantees underpinning
the defined contribution benefits.Changes to the balance sheet formatThe Governing Council of the ECB hasdecided to change the balance sheet format
as from the end of 2000. Changes have alsobeen made to the format of the ECB™s Profitand Loss Account. The comparative figures
shown for 1999 have been adjustedaccordingly.Other issuesHaving regard to the role of the ECB as acentral bank, the Executive Board of the ECBis of the opinion that the publication of a

cash flow statement will not provide the
readers of the financial statements with anyadditional relevant information.In accordance with Article 27 of the
Statute of the ESCB, and on the basis of a
recommendation of the Governing Councilof the ECB, the Council of the EuropeanUnion approved the appointment of
PricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH as theexternal auditors of the ECB.178179Notes on the Balance Sheet1Gold and gold receivables
The ECB holds 24 million ounces of fine gold.No transactions in gold took place in 2000.

The balance sheet movement is due to the
quarterly revaluation process (see ﬁGold,foreign currency assets and liabilitiesﬂ in the
notes on accounting policies).2Claims on non-euro area and euro
area residents denominated inforeign currencyThese claims consist of balances with foreign
banks, loans denominated in foreign currency

and investments in securities, denominatedin US dollars and Japanese yen.3Claims on non-euro area residents
and euro area credit institutions
denominated in euroClaims on non-euro residents consist ofbank deposits and repurchase operationsconducted in connection with themanagement of the ECB™s own funds. Similar
repurchase operations conducted with euroarea residents are shown under ﬁOther
claims on euro area credit institutions

denominated in euroﬂ.4Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euroThese securities comprise marketable debtissued by specific euro area issuers with ahigh level of credit quality.5Intra-Eurosystem claims
This item consists mainly of the TARGETbalances of the participating NCBs vis-à-visthe ECB (see ﬁIntra-ESCB balancesﬂ in the

notes on accounting policies).The significant change in this positioncompared with 1999 is principally due to theeffect of purchases of euro against foreign
currencies during the year, which weresettled via TARGET.6Other assets
6.1Tangible and intangible fixed assets
Net of cumulative depreciation totalling43.2 million, tangible fixed assets comprised
the following main items on 31 December2000:20001999
Due from participatingcentral banks in
respect ofTARGET59,010,910,1577,697,803,922
Due to participatingcentral banks inrespect ofTARGET(45,930,059,415)(9,418,628,635)
Net position13,080,850,742(1,720,824,713)
Net book valueNet book value
as atas at
 31 Dec. 2000 31 Dec. 1999
Land and buildings1,305,0970
Computers21,042,84915,865,660
Equipment, furniture,plant in building andmotor vehicles4,852,0475,955,720
Assets under construction21,691,24812,989,835
Other fixed assets15,276,9377,778,252
Total64,168,17842,589,467
The increase in fixed assets is primarily dueto investment in the ECB™s new second site,the Eurotheum. Land and buildings relatesto capitalised refurbishment costs at the
Eurotower.1806.2Other financial assets
The main components of this item are asfollows:(a)The investment portfolios relating to the
ECB pension fund, which are valued at42.9 million (1999: 32.2 million). Theassets held represent the investments of
accumulated pension contributions by theECB and the staff of the ECB as at31 December 2000, and are managed by
an external fund manager. The regularcontributions of the ECB and members ofthe plan have been invested on a monthly
basis. The assets of the plan are notfungible with other financial assets of theECB, and net income thereon does not
constitute income of the ECB, but isreinvested in the funds concerned, pendingpayment of benefits. The value of the
assets held by the plan is based on avaluation by the external fund manager,using year-end market prices.(b)The ECB holds 3,000 shares in the
Bank for International Settlements, which
are included at the acquisition cost of38.5 million.
6.3Off-balance-sheet instrument revaluation
differencesThis accounting entry represents arevaluation loss on off-balance-sheet forward
positions that arise from outstandingforeign exchange swap transactions. Sincethe corresponding on-balance-sheet spot
positions are revalued at the same rate asthe forward positions, no net valuationdifference results overall (see ﬁOff-balance-
sheet instrumentsﬂ in the notes onaccounting policies).6.4Accruals and deferred expenditure
The principal component of this item isaccrued interest on securities and otherfinancial assets.6.5Sundry items
This position consists mainly of a claim againstthe German Federal Ministry of Finance inrespect of recoverable value added and otherindirect taxes paid. Such taxes are refundable
under the terms of Article 3 of the Protocolconcerning the Privileges and Immunities ofthe European Communities, which applies to
the ECB by virtue of Article 40 of the Statuteof the ESCB.
7Liabilities to euro area credit
institutions denominated in euroThis item consists of the counterpart ofrepurchase operations conducted with euro
area credit institutions in connection withthe investment of the ECB™s own funds.8Liabilities to other euro area
residents denominated in euroThis item comprises deposits by members ofthe Euro Banking Association (EBA), which
are used in order to provide the ECB withcollateral in respect of the EBA payments
settled through the TARGET system.9Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in euroThese liabilities principally represent balances
held at the ECB by non-Eurosystem NCBsarising from transactions processed via the
TARGET system (see ﬁIntra-ESCB balancesﬂ

in the notes on accounting policies).10Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in foreigncurrencyLiabilities arising from repurchase agreementsin connection with the management of the
foreign currency reserves of the ECB areshown under this heading.181Capital key%Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique2.86581,432,900,000
Deutsche Bundesbank24.493512,246,750,000
Banco de España8.89354,446,750,000

Banque de France16.83378,416,850,000
Central Bank of Ireland0.8496424,800,000
Banca d™Italia14.89507,447,500,000
Banque centrale du Luxembourg0.149274,600,000
De Nederlandsche Bank4.27802,139,000,000

Oesterreichische Nationalbank2.35941,179,700,000
Banco de Portugal1.9232961,600,000
Suomen Pankki1.3970698,500,000
Total78.937939,468,950,000
11Intra-Eurosystem liabilities
At the start of Stage Three of EMU,the NCBs of the participating countriestransferred foreign reserve assets to the ECBin accordance with Article 30 of the Statute
of the ESCB and a Decision of the GoverningCouncil which gave effect to that Article.Amounts equivalent to 39.5 billion weretransferred between 4 and 7 January 1999, inthe form of gold, cash and securities.12Other liabilities
This item consists mainly of interest due to
the NCBs in respect of their claims relatingto the foreign reserves transferred (seeNote 11). The ECB™s liabilities in respect of

the pension fund of 42.9 million (1999:
32.2 million) and other accruals are also
shown under this item.13Provisions
Taking into account the ECB™s large exposureto exchange rate and interest rate risk, and
the current size of its revaluation reserves, itwas deemed appropriate to establish a specialprovision against these risks amounting to
2,600 million. The provision will be used tofund future realised and unrealised losses, in
particular valuation losses not covered by
the revaluation accounts. The continuingrequirement for this provision will bereviewed on an annual basis.The remaining balance consists ofadministrative provisions relating to

expenditure on goods and services.14Revaluation accounts
These accounts represent revaluation
reserves arising from unrealised gains onassets and liabilities.The resulting claims of the NCBs aredenominated in euro and are remunerated
at the short-term refinancing rates of theEurosystem, adjusted to reflect a zero returnon the gold component (see ﬁNotes on the
profit and loss accountﬂ, Note 1). During thefirst three years of Stage Three of EMU, andfollowing a decision of the Governing

Council, these claims are subject to a waiverin the event that the ECB has insufficient netincome and reserves to cover unrealised

losses caused by falls in the exchange ratesrelating to the foreign reserve assets held.
Any amounts to be waived may not reduce
the liability to below 80% of its original value.
As at 31 December 2000, no waiver of claimshad been invoked.20001999
Gold1,120,787,5641,036,876,277
Foreign currency6,228,835,2675,821,397,453
Securities623,004,033       2,265,980
Total7,972,626,8646,860,539,710
182Capital key%Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique2.8658143,290,000
Deutsche Bundesbank24.49351,224,675,000
Banco de España8.8935444,675,000
Banque de France16.8337841,685,000
Central Bank of Ireland0.849642,480,000
Banca d™Italia14.8950744,750,000
Banque centrale du Luxembourg0.14927,460,000
De Nederlandsche Bank4.2780213,900,000

Oesterreichische Nationalbank2.3594117,970,000
Banco de Portugal1.923296,160,000
Suomen Pankki1.397069,850,000
Total78.93793,946,895,000
The non-euro area NCBs™ contributions,which represent 5% of the amount which
would be payable if these countries were toparticipate in Monetary Union, amount to a
total of 52,655,250 as shown below:16Post-balance-sheet events
Based on Council Decision (2000/427/EC)of 19 June 2000 in accordance with Article122(2) of the Treaty on the adoption byGreece of the single currency on 1 January
2001, and in accordance with Article 49.1 ofthe Statute of the ESCB and the legalacts adopted by the Governing Council on

16 November 20003, the Bank of Greece
transferred to the ECB as at 1 January 2001
an amount of  97,679,000, representing the
remaining 95% of its capital subscription and,between 2 and 5 January 2001, in accordancewith Article 30.1 of the Statute of the ESCB,
foreign reserve assets with a total valueequivalent to 1,278,260,161. The totalamount transferred was determined by
multiplying the euro value, at the exchange
rates prevailing on 29 December 2000, of the
foreign reserve assets already transferred to

the ECB by the ratio between the number ofshares subscribed by the Bank of Greece andthe number of shares already paid up by the
other NCBs without a derogation. Theseforeign reserve assets comprised amounts ofgold, US dollars and Japanese yen in the same
proportions as the amounts transferredat the beginning of 1999 by the otherparticipating NCBs. The currency component
was transferred in the form of cash and
securities.3The Decision of the ECB of 16 November 2000 providing for
the paying up of capital and the contribution to the reserves and
provisions of the ECB by the Bank of Greece, and for the initial
transfer of foreign reserve assets to the ECB by the Bank of
Greece and related matters (ECB/2000/14) with the annexed
Guideline of the ECB of 3 November 1998, as amended by the
ECB Guideline of 16 November 2000 on the composition,
valuation and modalities for the initial transfer of foreign reserve
assets, and the denomination and remuneration of equivalent
claims. (ECB/2000/15), OJ L 336, 30.12.2000, pp. 110-117;
Agreement of 16 November 2000 between the ECB and the

Bank of Greece regarding the claim credited to the Bank of

Greece by the ECB under Article 30.3 of the Statute of the ESCB
and related matters, OJ L 336, 30.12.2000, pp. 122-123.
Capital key%Danmarks Nationalbank1.67094,177,250
Bank of Greece2.05645,141,000
Sveriges Riksbank2.65376,634,250
Bank of England14.681136,702,750
Total21.062152,655,250
These amounts represent contributions tocover the operational costs incurred by theECB in connection with tasks performed forthe non-euro area NCBs. The non-euro area
NCBs are not required to pay up any capital
subscriptions beyond the amounts alreadydecided until such time as they join the
Eurosystem. The non-participating NCBs arenot entitled to receive any share of thedistributable profits of the ECB, nor are they
liable to fund any losses of the ECB.15Capital and reserves
The fully paid-up subscriptions of theeuro area NCBs to the capital of the ECB
of 5 billion amount to a total of3,946,895,000, as shown below:183The Bank of Greece was credited with claimsin respect of the paid-up capital and foreignreserve assets equivalent to the amounts
transferred. These claims are to be treated in
an identical manner to the existing claims ofthe other participating NCBs (see
note 11).17Off-balance-sheet items
Unmatured foreign exchange swap contractliabilities with a value of 2,886 millionremained outstanding as at 31 December2000.No material contingent liabilities wereoutstanding as at 31 December 2000.184Notes on the Profit and Loss Account1Net interest income
This item includes interest income, net ofinterest expense, in respect of the assets and

liabilities denominated in foreign currency andnet interest income on balances arising
from TARGET and in respect of assets
and liabilities denominated in euro. The
remuneration paid to NCBs on their claims
on the ECB in respect of the foreign reserve
assets transferred at the beginning of 1999 isdisclosed separately.Interest income realised in connection withthe disposal of certain securities is nowpresented under the net interest income
caption of the Profit and Loss Account. Inorder to allow for a comparison, the 1999figures have been modified accordingly.The increase in net income compared with1999 is primarily due to higher net
interest income from foreign reserves andremuneration due to the ECB on balances
resulting from TARGET transactions. This has

been partially offset by higher remuneration
paid to the NCBs in respect of their claimsrelating to the foreign reserve assets
transferred, due to increases in the short-
term refinancing rates of the Eurosystem
(see note 11 on the Balance Sheet of the

ECB).2Realised gains/losses arising from
financial operationsSubstantial realised gains arose due to thesales of foreign currency by the ECB duringthe course of intervention operations in
September and November, and further as aresult of the disposals of foreign currencyincome earned since the beginning of 1999.
This item also contains net realised gains
arising from the disposal of securities, as aresult of normal portfolio management and
of the liquidation of portfolios prior to
intervention.3Write-downs in financial assets and
positionsGeneral increases in security prices in thelatter part of 2000 resulted in very limitedwrite-downs in the acquisition cost ofsecurities shown in the balance sheet to their
market value as at 31 December 2000.4Net income from fees and
commissionsThis item consists of the following incomeand expenses. Income arose from penaltiesimposed on credit institutions for non-
compliance with the minimum reserverequirements.20001999
Income from fees and
commissions1,296,112593,902
Expenses relating to fees
and commissions(622,614)(361,702)
Net income from feesand commissions673,498232,200
5Other income
Other miscellaneous income during the yeararose principally from the transfer of unusedadministrative provisions to the Profit and
Loss Account.6Staff costs
Salaries and allowances of 67 million (1999:52.3 million) and employer™s contributions
to the ECB™s pension fund and to health andaccident insurance are included under this
heading. The emoluments of the ExecutiveBoard of the ECB amounted to a total of1.8 million. No pensions were paid toformer members of the Executive Board ortheir dependants during the year. Salaries and
allowances of staff, including the emoluments185of holders of senior management positions,are modelled in essence on, and arecomparable with, the remuneration scheme
of the European Communities.On the last working day of 2000 the ECBemployed 941 staff, of whom 72 heldmanagerial positions. The average number ofstaff employed by the ECB in 2000 was 823
compared with 648 in 1999. 259 additional
staff were employed during the period, and50 members of staff left the service of the
ECB.7ECB™s retirement plan
In accordance with the rules of the ECB plan,a triennial full actuarial valuation is required.The latest actuarial valuation was carried outas at 31 December 1999, using the Projected
Unit Credit Method, subject to minimumliabilities equal to cash lump sums that wouldbe payable to members on termination of
service.The pension cost relating to the plan is
assessed in accordance with the advice of aqualified actuary. The total pension costto the ECB including a provision fordisability and post-retirement benefits was
13.1 million (1999: 8.1 million). Thisincludes a provision for pensions to members
of the Executive Board of 0.6 million (1999:
1.8 million). The required future service
contribution rate by the ECB is 16.5% ofpensionable earnings of all staff.8Administrative expenses
These cover all other current expensesrelating to rental of premises, maintenance
of premises, goods and equipment of anon-capital nature, professional fees and
other services and supplies, together with
staff-related expenses including recruitment,relocation, installation, training and
resettlement.The increase in administrative expenditure isprimarily due to additional operational costs
associated with the ECB™s main site, theEurotower, and higher consultancy fees,especially in connection with the preparation
of the Euro 2002 Information Campaign.186President and Governing Councilof the European Central BankFrankfurt am MainWe have audited the accompanying financial statements of the European Central Bank as at
31 December 2000. The European Central Bank™s Executive Board is responsible for the

preparation of the accounts. It is our responsibility to form an independent opinion on theseaccounts based on our audit, and to report our opinion to you.We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards of Auditing. An auditincludes examinations, on a test basis, of evidence relevant to the amounts and disclosures in
the accounts. It also includes an assessment of the significant estimates and judgements made
in the preparation of the accounts, and of whether the accounting policies are appropriate tothe European Central Bank™s circumstances and adequately disclosed.In our opinion, the financial statements, which have been prepared under accounting policiesset out in the first part of the notes on the accounts of the European Central Bank, give a true
and fair view of the financial position of the European Central Bank at 31 December 2000 and
the results of its operations for the year then ended.Frankfurt am Main, 14 March 2001PricewaterhouseCoopers
Gesellschaft mit beschränkter HaftungWirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft[signed][signed]
(Wagener)(Kern)

WirtschaftsprüferWirtschaftsprüfer
187Note on profit distribution
This note does not form a part of the financial
statements of the ECB for the year 2000. Itis published in the Annual Report forinformation purposes.Profit distributionArticle 33 of the Statute of the ESCB statesthat the net profit of the ECB shall be

transferred in the following order:An amount to be determined by the
Governing Council, which may not exceed20% of the net profit, shall be transferredto the general reserve fund subject to a
limit equal to 100% of the capital;The remaining net profit shall be
distributed to the shareholders of the ECBin proportion to their paid-up shares.In accordance with this Article, theGoverning Council decided on 29 March 2001
to transfer an amount of398 million to thegeneral reserve fund with the remaining
balance being distributable to theparticipating national central banks in

proportion to their paid-up capital.Non-participating national central banks arenot entitled to receive any share of thedistributable profits.20001999
Profit/loss for the year1,990,121,750(247,281,223)
Withdrawals from/allocatedto general reserve fund(398,024,350)27,540,513
Transfer from monetaryincome pooled035,160,676
Direct charge on NCBs0184,580,034

Distributable profits1,592,097,4000
Distribution to NCBs(1,592,097,400)
Total00
188AssetsBalance as atBalance as at
31 December 200031 December 1999
1Gold and gold receivables117,073116,610
2Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency2.1Receivables from the IMF26,73829,842
2.2Balances with banks and security investments,
external loans and other external assets232,087225,040
258,825254,882
3Claims on euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency15,78614,385
4Claims on non-euro area residents
denominated in euro
4.1Balances with banks, security investments
and loans3,7506,050
4.2Claims arising from the credit facility under
ERM II00
3,7506,050
5Lending to euro area credit institutions related  to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro5.1Main refinancing operations222,988161,987
5.2Longer-term refinancing operations45,00074,996

5.3Fine-tuning reverse operations00
5.4Structural reverse operations00
5.5Marginal lending facility60811,429

5.6Credits related to margin calls53404
268,648248,815
6Other claims on euro area credit institutions
denominated in euro5781,842
7Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro26,07123,521
8General government debt denominated in euro57,67159,180
9Other assets87,55981,567
Total assets835,961806,853
Due to rounding, totals/sub-totals may not add up.Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Eurosystem as at 31 December 2000(EUR millions)189LiabilitiesBalance as atBalance as at
31 December 200031 December 1999
1Banknotes in circulation371,370374,964
2Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro2.1Current accounts
(covering the minimum reserve system)124,402114,672
2.2Deposit facility2402,618
2.3Fixed-term deposits00
2.4Fine-tuning reverse operations00

2.5Deposits related to margin calls010
124,642117,301
3Other liabilities to euro area credit institutions
denominated in euro305283
4Debt certificates issued3,7847,876
5Liabilities to other euro area residents
denominated in euro5.1General government53,35356,470
5.2Other liabilities3,6945,292
57,04761,762
6Liabilities to non-euro area residents
denominated in euro10,8249,048
7Liabilities to euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency806927
8Liabilities to non-euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency
8.1Deposits, balances and other liabilities12,41411,904
8.2Liabilities arising from the credit facility under
ERM II00
12,41411,904
9Counterpart of special drawing rights
allocated by the IMF6,7026,534
10Other liabilities72,21554,222

11Revaluation accounts117,986106,782
12Capital and reserves57,86655,249
Total liabilities835,961806,853
190Annexes192Glossary Accession countries: there are currently 13 countries in central and eastern Europe and in theMediterranean which are recognised by the European Council as candidates for accession to the
European Union (EU). At present, the following 12 countries have formally started accessionnegotiations: Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta,

Poland, Romania, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia. Following a decision by the European Council inDecember 1999 Turkey also became an official candidate for accession, but the conditions to befulfilled before the start of negotiations have yet to be met. When referring to accession countries,

the Annual Report refers to those 12 countries with which the European Council has decided tostart formal negotiations for EU membership.Benchmark: in relation to investments, a benchmark is a reference portfolio or index
constructed on the basis of the objectives for the liquidity and risk of as well as the return on theinvestments. The benchmark serves as a basis for comparison of the performance of the actual
portfolio. In the context of the foreign reserve management of the European Central Bank(ECB), the strategic benchmark is a reference portfolio reflecting the long-term risk/returnpreferences of the ECB. Its characteristics are amended only in exceptional circumstances. The
tactical benchmark reflects the risk/return preferences of the ECB with a time horizon of a fewmonths, based on prevailing market conditions. It is reviewed on a monthly basis.Bilateral procedure: a procedure whereby the central bank deals directly with one or only a fewcounterparties, without making use of tender procedures. Bilateral procedures include
operations executed through stock exchanges or market agents.Central securities depository (CSD): an entity which holds securities and which enablessecurities transactions to be processed by book entry. Physical securities may be immobilised by
the depository or securities may be dematerialised (i.e. so that they exist only as electronicrecords). In addition to the safekeeping and administration of securities (e.g. services for issuanceand redemption), a central securities depository may perform clearing and settlement functions.Collateral: assets pledged as a guarantee for the repayment of the short-term liquidity loans
which credit institutions receive from the central banks, as well as assets sold to central banks
by credit institutions as part of repurchase operations.Consolidated MFI balance sheet: the consolidated balance sheet of the 
Monetary FinancialInstitution (MFI) sector is obtained by netting out inter-MFI positions (e.g. inter-MFI loans and
deposits of money market funds with MFIs) on the aggregated MFI balance sheet. It providesinformation on the MFI sector™s assets and liabilities vis-à-vis residents of the euro area not
belonging to this sector (i.e. general government
 and other euro area residents) and vis-à-vis
non-euro area residents. The consolidated balance sheet is the main statistical source for thecalculation of monetary aggregates and it provides the basis for the regular analysis of the
counterparts of M3.Convergence programmes: see 
stability programmes.Copenhagen criteria: the overall criteria which applicant countries have to meet as aprerequisite for becoming members of the European Union were defined in general terms by the
Copenhagen European Council in June 1993. The Copenhagen criteria require (i) the stability of
institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human rights, and the respect for andprotection of minorities; (ii) the existence of a functioning market economy as well as the capacity193to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU; and (iii) the ability to take onthe obligations of membership, including adherence to the aims of political unification as well as
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).Correspondent banking: an arrangement whereby one bank provides payment services and
other services to another bank. Payments through correspondents are usually executed through
reciprocal accounts (nostro and loro accounts), to which standing credit lines may be attached.Correspondent banking services are primarily provided across international boundaries, but arealso known as agency relationships in some domestic contexts. A loro account is the term used by
a correspondent to describe an account held on behalf of a foreign bank; the foreign bank would
regard this account as its nostro account.Correspondent central banking model (CCBM): a model established by the EuropeanSystem of Central Banks (ESCB) with the aim of enabling 
counterparties to transfer eligible
assets as collateral in a cross-border context. In the CCBM, national central banks act ascustodians for one another. This means that each national central bank has a securities account inits securities administration for each of the other national central banks (and for the EuropeanCentral Bank (ECB)
).Council of Ministers: see 
EU Council.Counterparty: the opposite party in a financial transaction (e.g. any transaction with the central
bank).Credit institution: an institution covered by the definition in Article 1 (1) of Directive
2000/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 March 2000 relating to the takingup and pursuit of the business of credit institutions. According to this definition, a credit institution

is (a) an undertaking whose business is to receive deposits or other repayable funds from the publicand to grant credits for its own account, or (b) an electronic money institution within the meaningof Directive 2000/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 September 2000 on

the taking up, pursuit and prudential supervision of the business of electronic money institutions.
Credit to euro area residents: a broad measure of the financing of non-Monetary FinancialInstitution (MFI) euro area residents (including 
general government and the private sector)
provided by the MFI sector. It is defined as including loans and MFI holdings of securities. The latterinclude shares, other equity and debt securities, including money market paper issued by non-MFI
euro area residents. As securities can be seen as an alternative source of funds to loans, and assome loans can be securitised, this definition provides more accurate information on the total
amount of financing provided by the MFI sector to the economy than a narrow definition
comprising loans only.
Currency in circulation: currency in circulation includes both banknotes and coins in circulation
that are commonly used to make payments. It includes banknotes issued by the 
Eurosystem and
by other Monetary Financial Institutions (MFIs) in the 
euro area (in Ireland and
Luxembourg) as well as the coins issued by some national central banks of the Eurosystem and by

the central government. Currency in circulation as included in M3 is a net concept, i.e. it refers
only to banknotes and coins in circulation that are held outside the MFI sector (as shown on theconsolidated MFI balance sheet, implying that currency issued but held by MFIs Œ ﬁvaultcashﬂ Œ has been subtracted). Currency in circulation does not include a central bank™s stock ofown banknotes (as they are not issued), nor commemorative coins that are not commonly used to
make payments.194Debt ratio: the subject of one of the fiscal convergence criteria laid down in Article 104 (2) of the
Treaty. It is defined as the ratio of government debt to gross domestic product at current marketprices, while government debt is defined in Protocol No. 20 (on the excessive deficit procedure) as
the total gross debt at nominal value outstanding at the end of the year and consolidated betweenand within the sectors of general government
. General government is as defined in the
European System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95).Deficit-debt adjustment: the difference between the government deficit and the change in
government debt. Among other reasons, this may arise due to changes in the amount of financial

assets held by the government, to a change in government debt held by other government sub-sectors or to statistical adjustments.Deficit ratio: the subject of one of the fiscal convergence criteria named in Article 104 (2) of theTreaty. It is defined as the ratio of the planned or actual government deficit to gross domesticproduct at current market prices, while the government deficit is defined in Protocol No. 20 (on
the excessive deficit procedure) as net borrowing of the
 general government
. Generalgovernment is as defined in the European System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95)
.Delivery versus payment (DVP) system or delivery against payment system: amechanism in a securities settlement system (SSS)
 which ensures that the final transfer of
one asset occurs if, and only if, the final transfer of another asset or other assets occurs. Assets

could include securities and/or other financial instruments.Deposit facility: a 
standing facility of the 
Eurosystem which 
counterparties may use to
make overnight deposits at a national central bank and which are remunerated at a pre-specified
interest rate.Deposits redeemable at notice: this category consists of saving deposits for which the holder
has to respect a fixed period of notice before being able to withdraw the funds. In some casesthere is the possibility of withdrawing a certain fixed amount in a specified period or of earlier
withdrawal subject to the payment of a penalty. Deposits redeemable at a period of notice of up to
three months belong to M2 (and hence to 
M3), while those with a longer period of notice belong
to the (non-monetary) longer-term financial liabilities of the Monetary Financial Institution(MFI) sector.
Deposits with agreed maturity: this instrument category consists mainly of time deposits witha given maturity that, depending on national practices, may be either not convertible prior to
maturity or convertible only subject to a penalty. It also encompasses some non-marketable debtinstruments, such as non-marketable (retail) certificates of deposit. Deposits with an agreed

maturity of up to two years are included in M2 (and hence in 
M3), while those with an agreedmaturity of over two years are included in the (non-monetary) longer-term financial liabilities ofthe Monetary Financial Institution (MFI) sector.
ECOFIN: see 
EU Council.Economic and Financial Committee:
 a consultative Community body set up at the start of
Stage Three, when the Monetary Committee was dissolved. The Member States, the 
EuropeanCommission and the
 European Central Bank (ECB)
 each appoint no more than two
members of the Committee. The two members appointed by the Member States are selected
respectively from among senior officials from the national administrations and the national centralbanks. Article 114 (2) of the 
Treaty contains a list of the tasks of the Economic and Financial
195Committee, which include reviewing the economic and financial situation of the Member States andof the Community.Economic and Monetary Union (EMU): the 
Treaty describes the process of achieving
Economic and Monetary Union in the European Union in three stages. Stage One of EMU started inJuly 1990 and ended on 31 December 1993; it was mainly characterised by the dismantling of all

internal barriers to the free movement of capital within the European Union. Stage Two of EMUbegan on 1 January 1994. It provided for, inter alia, the establishment of the 
European MonetaryInstitute (EMI), the prohibition of financing of the public sector by the central banks,the prohibition of privileged access to financial institutions by the public sector and the avoidanceof excessive government deficits. Stage Three started on 1 January 1999 with the transfer of
monetary competence to the 
Eurosystem and the introduction of the 
euro.ECU (European Currency Unit): the ECU was a basket currency made up of the sum of fixed
amounts of 12 of the 15 currencies of the EU Member States. The value of the ECU was calculated
as a weighted average of the value of its component currencies. The ECU was replaced by theeuro on a one-for-one basis on 1 January 1999.
Effective (nominal/real) exchange rates: nominal effective exchange rates consist of a
weighted average of various bilateral exchange rates. Real effective exchange rates are nominaleffective exchange rates deflated by a weighted average of foreign, relative to domestic, prices or

costs. They are thus measures of price and cost competitiveness. The nominal effective exchangerate of the euro calculated by the 
European Central Bank (ECB) is a geometric weighted
average of the exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of 13 trading partners of the euroarea. The weightings are based on trade in manufactured goods with the trading partners in theperiod from 1995 to 1997 and take into account third market effects. The real effective exchangerate for the euro is calculated using consumer price indices (the Harmonised Index ofConsumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area and other EU Member States).Electronic money (e-money): an electronic store of monetary value on a technical device that
may be widely used for making payments to undertakings other than the issuer without necessarilyinvolving bank accounts in the transaction, but acting as a prepaid bearer instrument (see alsomulti-purpose prepaid card).EMU: see 
Economic and Monetary Union.EONIA (euro overnight index average): a measure of the effective interest rate prevailing inthe euro interbank overnight market. It is computed as a weighted average of the interest rates on
unsecured overnight contracts on deposits denominated in euro, as reported by a panel of
contributing banks.ERM II (exchange rate mechanism II):
 the exchange rate arrangement which provides the
framework for exchange rate policy co-operation between the euro area and EU Member States
not participating in the euro area from the start of Stage Three of Economic and MonetaryUnion (EMU). Membership of the mechanism is voluntary. Nevertheless, Member States with aderogation can be expected to join the mechanism. Currently, the Danish krone participates inERM II with a fluctuation band around the central rate against the 
euro of ±2.25%. Prior to the
adoption of the euro by Greece on 1 January 2001, the Greek drachma participated in ERM II with
a fluctuation band of ±15%. Foreign exchange intervention and financing at the margins of
the standard or narrower fluctuation bands are, in principle, automatic and unlimited, with veryshort-term financing available. The European Central Bank (ECB) and the participating
196non-euro area national central banks could, however, suspend automatic intervention if this were
to conflict with their primary objective of maintaining price stability.EU Council: an institution of the European Community. It is made up of representatives of the
governments of the Member States, normally the ministers responsible for the matters underconsideration (therefore often referred to as the Council of Ministers). The EU Council meeting in
the composition of the ministers of finance and economy is often referred to as the ECOFINCouncil. In addition, the EU Council may meet in the composition of the Heads of State orGovernment (see also European Council).EURIBOR (euro interbank offered rate): the rate at which a prime bank is willing to lend
funds in euro to another prime bank. The EURIBOR is computed daily for interbank deposits with
a maturity of one week and one to 12 months as the average of the daily offer rates of arepresentative panel of prime banks, rounded to three decimal places.Euro: the name of the European currency adopted by the 
European Council at its meeting in
Madrid on 15 and 16 December 1995 and used instead of the term ECU (European Currency
Unit) employed in the 
Treaty.Euro area: the area encompassing those Member States in which the 
euro has been adopted as
the single currency in accordance with the Treaty and in which a single monetary policy isconducted under the responsibility of the Governing Council of the 
European Central Bank(ECB). In 2000 the euro area comprised Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Ireland, Italy,Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal and Finland. Greece joined the euro area on
1 January 2001, thus raising the number of countries in the euro area to 12.Euro Banking Association (EBA): an organisation intended to be a forum for exploring and
debating all issues of interest to its members and, in particular, matters pertaining to the use ofthe euro and the settlement of transactions in euro. The EBA established a clearing company
(ABE Clearing, Société par Actions Simplifiée à capital variable) for the purpose of managing the

Euro Clearing System as from 1 January 1999. The Euro Clearing System (Euro 1) is the successorto the ECU Clearing and Settlement System.Euro central rate: the official exchange rate of 
ERM II 
member currencies vis-à-vis the euro,around which the ERM II fluctuation margins are defined.Eurogroup: informal grouping bringing together those members of the 
ECOFIN Council who
represent the Member States of the euro area. It meets on a regular basis (usually prior tomeetings of the ECOFIN Council) to discuss issues connected with the euro area Member States™
shared responsibilities for the single currency. The European Commission and, when
appropriate, the European Central Bank (ECB) are invited to take part in these meetings.
European Central Bank (ECB): the ECB lies at the centre of the 
European System ofCentral Banks (ESCB) and the 
Eurosystem and has legal personality under Community law. It
ensures that the tasks conferred upon the Eurosystem and the ESCB are implemented either by itsown activities pursuant to the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the
European Central Bank or through the national central banks.197European Commission (Commission of the European Communities): the institution of
the European Community which ensures the application of the provisions of the Treaty. TheCommission develops Community policies, proposes Community legislation and exercises powers
in specific areas. In the area of economic policy, the Commission recommends broad guidelines foreconomic policies in the Community and reports to the EU Council on economic developments
and policies. It monitors public finances within the framework of multilateral surveillance and
submits reports to the Council. It consists of 20 members and includes two nationals each fromGermany, Spain, France, Italy and the United Kingdom, and one from each of the other Member
States.European Council: provides the European Union with the necessary impetus for its
development and defines the general political guidelines thereof. It brings together the Heads of
State or Government of the Member States and the President of the European Commission(see also EU Council).European Monetary Institute (EMI): a temporary institution established at the start of StageTwo of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) on 1 January 1994. The two main tasks of theEMI were to strengthen central bank co-operation and monetary policy co-ordination and to make
the preparations required for the establishment of the European System of Central Banks(ESCB), for the conduct of the single monetary policy and for the creation of a single currency inStage Three. It went into liquidation following the establishment of the European Central Bank(ECB) on 1 June 1998.
European Parliament: consists of 626 representatives of the citizens of the Member States. It is
a part of the legislative process, although with different prerogatives according to the proceduresthrough which EU law is to be enacted. In the framework of Economic and Monetary Union(EMU), the Parliament has mainly consultative powers. However, the Treaty establishes certain
procedures for the democratic accountability of the 
European Central Bank (ECB) to the
Parliament (presentation of the annual report, general debate on the monetary policy, hearings
before the competent parliamentary committees).European System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95): a system of uniform statistical definitions and
classifications aimed at achieving a harmonised quantitative description of the economies of the
Member States. The ESA 95 is the Community™s version of the world System of National Accounts1993 (SNA 93). The ESA 95 is a new version of the European system, implementation of whichbegan in the course of 1999 in accordance with Council Regulation (EC) No. 2223/96.European System of Central Banks (ESCB): is composed of the 
European Central Bank(ECB) and the national central banks of all 15 Member States, i.e. it includes, in addition to the
members of the Eurosystem, the national central banks of the Member States which did notadopt the euro at the start of Stage Three of 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)
. TheESCB is governed by the Governing Council and the 
Executive Board of the ECB, and, as a
third decision-making body of the ECB, by the 
General Council.Eurostat: the Statistical Office of the European Communities, Eurostat is part of the 
EuropeanCommission and is responsible for the production of Community statistics.
EURO STOXX
: STOXX Limited (www.stoxx.com) publishes the Dow Jones STOXX indices
which measure stock price developments in Europe as a whole. The Dow Jones EURO STOXXindex is one member of this index family. This index aggregates the prices of a broad range ofstocks from those countries belonging to the euro area. Furthermore, three types of sector index198(economic and market sectors as well as industry groups) are available for the Dow Jones EURO
STOXX index.Eurosystem: comprises the 
European Central Bank (ECB) and the national central banks ofthe Member States which have adopted the euro in Stage Three of 
Economic and MonetaryUnion (EMU) (see also euro area
). There are currently 12 national central banks in theEurosystem. The Eurosystem is governed by the Governing Council and the Executive Boardof the ECB.Eurosystem™s foreign exchange liquidity position: this comprises the
 Eurosystem™s
international reserves and the Eurosystem™s other foreign currency claims and liabilities,including positions vis-à-vis euro area residents such as, for instance, foreign exchange deposits
placed with banking institutions resident in the euro area.Eurosystem™s  international reserves:
 the reserve assets of the 
euro area consist of the
Eurosystem™s reserve assets, i.e. the reserve assets of the European Central Bank (ECB)
, andthe reserve assets held by the national central banks of the participating Member States. Reserve
assets must be under the effective control of the relevant monetary authority, whether the ECB or
the national central bank of one of the participating Member States, and refer to highly liquid,marketable and creditworthy foreign (non-euro) currency-denominated claims on non-euro arearesidents, plus gold, special drawing rights and the reserve positions in the International Monetary

Fund of the participating national central banks.Executive Board: one of the decision-making bodies of the European Central Bank (ECB). Itcomprises the President and the Vice-President of the ECB and four other members appointed bycommon accord by the Heads of State or Government of the Member States which have adoptedthe euro.Fine-tuning operation: a non-regular open market operation executed by the Eurosystemmainly in order to deal with unexpected liquidity fluctuations in the market.
Foreign exchange swap: two simultaneous spot and forward transactions of one currency
against another. The Eurosystem may execute open market monetary policy operations in the
form of foreign exchange swaps where the national central banks (or the 
European CentralBank (ECB)) buy or sell euro spot against a foreign currency and at the same time sell or buy it
back in a forward transaction.Frontloading: the distribution of 
euro banknotes and/or coins to credit institutions prior to
2002.Funds transfer system (FTS):
 a formal arrangement, based on private contract or statute law,
with multiple membership, common rules and standardised arrangements, for the transmission and
settlement of money obligations arising between the members.General Council: one of the governing bodies of the 
European Central Bank (ECB). Itcomprises the President and the Vice-President of the ECB and the governors of all 15 EU nationalcentral banks.General government: as defined in the 
European System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95)
,consists of central, state and local government and social security funds.199Governing Council: one of the governing bodies of the 
European Central Bank (ECB). Itcomprises all the members of the Executive Board of the ECB and the governors of the national
central banks of the Member States which have adopted the euro.Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP): the HICP is the measure of prices used by
the Governing Council
 for the purpose of assessing 
price stability. The HICP was developedby the European Commission (Eurostat) in close liaison with the national statistical institutesand the European Monetary Institute (EMI), and later the 
European Central Bank (ECB),in order to fulfil the Treaty requirement for a consumer price index constructed on a comparable
basis, taking into account differences in national definitions.Implied interest rate volatility: a measure of expected volatility in future short and long-term
interest rates, which can be extracted from options prices. Given the observed market price of anoption, the implied volatility can be extracted using a standard options pricing formula whichexplicitly depends on, inter alia, the expected volatility of the underlying asset price during the
period until the option expires. The underlying assets can be futures contracts on short-terminterest rates, such as the three-month EURIBOR, or on long-term bonds such as ten-year
German Bunds. Given appropriate assumptions, the implied volatility may be interpreted as the

market™s expectation of volatility during the remaining life of the option.Interbank funds transfer system (IFTS): 
a funds transfer system in which most (or all)
direct participants are credit institutions.Interlinking mechanism: one of the components of the 
TARGET system. The term is usedto designate the infrastructures and procedures which link domestic RTGS systems in order
to process cross-border payments within TARGET.Key ECB interest rates: the ECB interest rates which determine the stance of the monetary
policy of the European Central Bank (ECB)
. At present, the key ECB interest rates are theminimum bid rate on the 
main refinancing operations, the interest rate on the 
marginallending facility and the interest rate on the 
deposit facility. Prior to the decision to conduct themain refinancing operations as variable rate tenders, the rate on fixed rate tenders had played therole of ﬁkey rateﬂ. This role is currently performed by the minimum bid rate on the main
refinancing operations of the ECB.Large-value payments: payments, generally of very large amounts, which are mainly exchangedbetween banks or between participants in the financial markets and usually require urgent andtimely settlement.Links between securities settlement systems: the procedures and arrangements between
two securities settlement systems
 for the cross-border transfer of securities through a book-
entry process.Longer-term refinancing operation:
 a regular 
open market operation executed by the
Eurosystem in the form of a 
reverse transaction. Longer-term refinancing operations areexecuted through monthly standard tenders and have a maturity of three months.
Loss-sharing rule (or agreement): an agreement between participants in a transfer system or a
clearing house arrangement regarding the allocation of any loss arising when one or moreparticipants fail to fulfil their obligations; the agreement stipulates how the loss will be shared
among the parties concerned in the event of its being activated.200Lump-sum allowance: a fixed amount which an institution may deduct in the calculation of its
reserve requirement within the minimum reserve framework of the 
Eurosystem.M1, M2, M3: see monetary aggregates.Main refinancing operation: a regular open market operation executed by the
Eurosystem in the form of a 
reverse transaction. Main refinancing operations are conductedthrough weekly standard tenders and have a maturity of two weeks.
Maintenance period: the period over which compliance with 
reserve requirements is
calculated. The maintenance period for 
Eurosystem minimum reserves is one month, starting on
the 24th calendar day of each month and ending on the 23rd calendar day of the following month.Marginal lending facility: a 
standing facility of the 
Eurosystem which 
counterparties may
use to receive overnight credit from a national central bank against a pre-specified interest rate.Minimum bid rate: the lower limit to the interest rates at which 
counterparties may submitbids in variable rate tenders. As a key ECB interest rate
 it plays, at present, the role previously
covered by the rate in fixed rate tenders.
Monetary aggregates: a monetary aggregate can be defined as the sum of currency incirculation plus outstanding amounts of certain liabilities of financial institutions that have a high
degree of ﬁmoneynessﬂ (or liquidity in a broad sense). The narrow monetary aggregate M1 has
been defined by the Eurosystem as currency in circulation plus 
euro area residents™ (other than
central government) holdings of overnight deposits with euro area money-issuing institutions.
The monetary aggregate M2 comprises M1 plus 
deposits with agreed maturity of up to two
years and deposits redeemable at notice of up to three months. The broad monetary
aggregate M3 includes M2 plus 
repurchase agreements
, money market fund shares/units andmoney market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years. The GoverningCouncil has announced a reference value for the growth of M3 (see also 
reference value formonetary growth).Monetary Financial Institutions (MFIs): financial institutions which form the money-issuing
sector of the euro area. These include central banks, resident credit institutions as defined in
Community law and all other resident financial institutions whose business is to receive depositsand/or close substitutes for deposits from entities other than MFIs and, for their own account (at

least in economic terms), to grant credit and/or invest in securities. The latter group consistspredominantly of money market funds. At the end of 2000, there were 9,096 MFIs in the euro area(the European Central Bank (ECB), 11 national central banks, 7,476 credit institutions, 1,600money market funds and 8 other financial institutions).Multi-purpose prepaid card: a stored value card which can be used for a wide range of payment
purposes and which has the potential to be used on a national or international scale, but which maysometimes be restricted to a certain area. A reloadable multi-purpose prepaid card is also knownas an electronic purse (see also electronic money (e-money)).Net international investment position (i.i.p.) (or net external asset or liabilityposition): the statistical statement of the value and composition of the stock of an economy™s
financial assets or financial claims vis-à-vis the rest of the world, less an economy™s financialliabilities to the rest of the world.201Net settlement system (NSS): a funds transfer system, the settlement operations of whichare completed on a bilateral or multilateral net basis.Open market operation: an operation executed on the initiative of the central bank in thefinancial markets involving one of the following transactions: (i) buying or selling assets outright
(spot or forward); (ii) buying or selling assets under a 
repurchase agreement; (iii) lending or
borrowing against underlying assets as collateral; (iv) the issuance of central bank debt
certificates; (v) the acceptance of fixed-term deposits; or (vi) 
foreign exchange swaps between
domestic and foreign currencies.Option: an option is a financial instrument which gives the owner the right, but not the obligation,
to buy or sell a specific underlying asset (e.g. a bond or a stock) at a predetermined price (the

strike or exercise price) at or up to a certain future date (the exercise or maturity date). A calloption gives the holder the right to purchase the underlying asset at an agreed exercise price,
whereas a put option gives the holder the right to sell it at an agreed exercise price.Outright transaction:
 a transaction whereby assets are bought or sold up to their maturity
(spot or forward).Overnight deposits: this instrument category comprises mainly those sight/demand deposits
which are fully transferable (by cheque or similar instrument). It also includes non-transferable
deposits that are convertible on demand or by close of business the following day.Payment versus payment (PVP): a mechanism in a foreign exchange settlement system which
ensures that a final transfer of one currency occurs if, and only if, a final transfer of the othercurrency or currencies takes place.Price stability: the maintenance of price stability is the primary objective of the 
EuropeanCentral Bank (ECB). The Governing Council has published a quantitative definition of price
stability in order to give clear guidance to expectations of future price developments. The
Governing Council defines price stability as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index ofConsumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area
 of below 2%. Reflecting the need for monetary
policy to have a forward-looking, medium-term orientation, price stability according to this

definition is to be maintained over the medium term. The definition delineates an upper boundary
for the rate of measured inflation and, at the same time, the use of the word ﬁincreaseﬂ signals that
deflation, i.e. prolonged declines in the level of the HICP, would not be deemed consistent with

price stability.Primary balance: government net borrowing or net lending excluding interest payments onconsolidated government liabilities.Quick tender: the tender procedure used by the Eurosystem for 
fine-tuning operations.Quick tenders are executed within a time frame of one hour and are restricted to a limited set ofcounterparties.Realignment: a change in the central parity of a currency participating in an exchange rate systemwith a fixed but adjustable peg. In ERM II a realignment consists of a change in the 
euro centralrate.Re-denomination of securities: the denomination of a security is the currency in which the par
value of the security is expressed (in most cases, the face value of a certificate). Re-denomination202refers to a procedure through which the original denomination of a security, issued in a nationalcurrency, is changed into euro at the irrevocably fixed conversion rate.
Reference value for monetary growth: the 
Governing Council assigns money a prominentrole in the conduct of its policy, implying that monetary aggregates
 and their counterparts are
thoroughly analysed regarding their information content for future price developments. This is
signalled by the announcement of a reference value for the growth rate of the monetary aggregateM3. The reference value is derived in a manner which is consistent with and serves theachievement of the Governing Council™s definition of price stability on the basis of medium-term
assumptions regarding trend real GDP growth and the trend in the velocity of circulation of M3.
Substantial or prolonged deviations of M3 growth from the reference value would, under normalcircumstances, signal risks to price stability over the medium term. However, the concept of the
reference value does not entail a commitment on the part of the Governing Council to correctmechanistically deviations of M3 growth from the reference value.Reference value for the fiscal position: Treaty Protocol No. 20 on the excessive deficit
procedure sets explicit reference values for the 
general government deficit ratio (3% of GDP)
and the debt ratio (60% of GDP) (see also 
Stability and Growth Pact).Remote access (to an IFTS): the facility enabling a 
credit institution established in one
country (ﬁhome countryﬂ) to become a direct participant in an interbank funds transfersystem (IFTS) established in another country (ﬁhost countryﬂ) and, for that purpose, to have a
settlement account in its own name with the central bank in the host country without necessarilyhaving established a branch in that country.Repurchase agreement: an arrangement whereby an asset is sold while the seller
simultaneously obtains the right and obligation to repurchase it at a specific price on a future date
or on demand. Such an agreement is similar to collateralised borrowing, with the exception that
ownership of the securities is not retained by the seller. The Eurosystem uses repurchase
agreements with a fixed maturity in its reverse transactions. Repurchase transactions areincluded in M3 in cases where the seller is a 
Monetary Financial Institution (MFI) and
the counterparty is a non-MFI resident in the euro area. According to the Regulation of theECB concerning the consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector (ECB/1998/16), repurchaseoperations (repos) are classified as deposit liabilities since they are not marketable.
Repurchase operation (repo): a liquidity-providing 
reverse transaction based on a
repurchase agreement.Reserve base: the sum of the balance sheet items (in particular liabilities) which constitute the
basis for calculating the reserve requirement of a 
credit institution.Reserve ratio: the ratio defined by the central bank for each category of eligible balance sheetitem included in the 
reserve base. The ratios are used to calculate reserve requirements
.Reserve requirement: 
the requirement for institutions to hold minimum reserves with the
central bank. In the minimum reserve framework of the Eurosystem, the reserve requirement ofa credit institution is calculated by multiplying the 
reserve ratio for each category of item in
the reserve base with the amount of those items on the institution™s balance sheet. In addition,
institutions are allowed to deduct a 
lump-sum allowance
 from their reserve requirement.
203Reverse transaction: 
an operation whereby the central bank buys or sells assets under arepurchase agreement or conducts credit operations against 
collateral.RTGS (real-time gross settlement) system: a settlement system in which processing and
settlement take place on an order-by-order basis (without netting) in real time (continuously). Seealso TARGET.Securities settlement system (SSS):
 a system which permits the transfer of securities either
free of payment or against payment.Settlement agent: an institution that manages the settlement process (e.g. the determination ofsettlement positions, monitoring the exchange of payments, etc.) for transfer systems or other
arrangements that require settlement.Settlement risk: a general term used to designate the risk that settlement in a transfer system
will not take place as expected. This risk may comprise both credit and liquidity risk.Stability and Growth Pact: consists of two 
EU Council Regulations on the strengthening of
the surveillance of budgetary positions and the surveillance and co-ordination of economic policiesand on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure, and of aEuropean Council Resolution on the Stability and Growth Pact adopted at the Amsterdam
summit on 17 June 1997. It is intended to serve as a means of safeguarding sound governmentfinances in Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) in order to strengthen the
conditions for price stability and for strong sustainable growth conducive to employment
creation. More specifically, budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus are required as the
medium-term objective for Member States, which would allow them to deal with normal cyclical
fluctuations while keeping the government deficit below the reference value of 3% of GDP. In
accordance with the Stability and Growth Pact, countries participating in EMU will report stabilityprogrammes, while non-participating countries will continue to provide convergence
programmes.Stability programmes: medium-term government plans and assumptions provided by
participating Member States regarding the development of key economic variables towards the

achievement of the medium-term objective of a budgetary position close to balance or in surplus asreferred to in the Stability and Growth Pact. Regarding budgetary positions, measures toconsolidate fiscal balances as well as underlying economic scenarios are highlighted. Stability
programmes must be updated annually. They are examined by the European Commission and
the Economic and Financial Committee. Their reports serve as the basis for an assessment bythe ECOFIN Council, focusing, in particular, on whether the medium-term budgetary objective in
the programme provides for an adequate safety margin to ensure the avoidance of an excessivedeficit. Countries not participating in the euro area must submit annual convergence
programmes, in accordance with the Stability and Growth Pact.Standard tender: a tender procedure used by the 
Eurosystem in its regular 
open marketoperations. Standard tenders are carried out within a time frame of 24 hours. Allcounterparties fulfilling the general eligibility criteria are entitled to submit bids in standard
tenders.Standing facility: a central bank facility available to counterparties on their own initiative. The
Eurosystem offers two overnight standing facilities: the 
marginal lending facility
 and the
deposit facility.204Sub-frontloading: the distribution of 
euro banknotes and/or coins by credit institutions to
certain target groups (e.g. retailers, cash-in-transit companies, the cash-operated machine industryand the general public) prior to 2002.TARGET (Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross settlement Express Transfersystem): a payment system composed of one 
RTGS system in each of the 15 EU Member Statesand the ECB payment mechanism. The domestic RTGS systems and the ECB payment mechanismare interconnected according to common procedures (Interlinking mechanism) to allowcross-border transfers throughout the EU to move from one system to another.
Treaty: refers to the Treaty establishing the European Community. The Treaty was signed in
Rome on 25 March 1957 and entered into force on 1 January 1958. It established the European
Economic Community (EEC), which is now the European Community (EC), and is often referred toas the ﬁTreaty of Romeﬂ. The Treaty on European Union (which is often referred to as theﬁMaastricht Treatyﬂ) was signed on 7 February 1992 and entered into force on 1 November 1993.
The Treaty on European Union amended the Treaty establishing the European Community andestablished the European Union. The ﬁTreaty of Amsterdamﬂ, which was signed in Amsterdam on
2 October 1997 and entered into force on 1 May 1999, amended both the Treaty establishing the
European Community and the Treaty on European Union. Equally, the ﬁTreaty of Niceﬂ, whichconcluded the 2000 Intergovernmental Conference and was signed on 26 February 2001, willfurther amend the Treaty establishing the European Community and the Treaty on European
Union, once it is ratified and enters into force.
UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommunications System): system for ﬁthird generationﬂ
mobile telecommunication. Licences for frequencies for mobile telecommunication are being soldor awarded by EU governments to telecommunications companies. Following a Eurostatrecommendation, the proceeds from the sale of these licences are to be registered in the
government accounts as the sale of a non-financial asset, thus improving government budgetary
balances. However, these proceeds are only one-off in nature and do not, therefore, lead to alasting improvement of budgetary balances. Government debt should, in principle, fall to a
permanently lower level because of the UMTS proceeds.205Monetary policy chronology4 January 2000The ECB announces that on 5 January 2000
the Eurosystem will conduct a liquidity-
absorbing fine-tuning operation with same-day settlement. This measure aims atrestoring normal liquidity conditions in the
money market after the successful transitionto the year 2000.5 January 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility and
the deposit facility will remain unchanged at3.0%, 4.0% and 2.0% respectively.15 January 2000At the request of the Greek authorities, theministers of the euro area Member States,the ECB and the ministers and central bank
governors of Denmark and Greece decide,following a common procedure, to revaluethe central rate of the Greek drachma in the
exchange rate mechanism (ERM II) by 3½%,
with effect from 17 January 2000.20 January 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility and
the deposit facility will remain unchanged at3.0%, 4.0% and 2.0% respectively.It also announces that the Eurosystem intendsto allot an amount of 20 billion for each ofthe longer-term refinancing operations to be
conducted in the first half of 2000. Thisamount takes into consideration the expectedliquidity needs of the banking system of the

euro area in the first half of 2000 and the
desire of the Eurosystem to continue toprovide the bulk of its refinancing of thefinancial sector through its main refinancingoperations.3 February 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
to raise the interest rate on the mainrefinancing operations of the Eurosystem by0.25 percentage point to 3.25%, starting from
the operation to be settled on 9 February2000. In addition, it decides to increasethe interest rates on both the marginal
lending facility and the deposit facility by
0.25 percentage point, to 4.25% and 2.25%respectively, both with effect from 4 February

2000.17 February, 2 March 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the interest rates on the main refinancingoperations, the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility will remain unchanged at
3.25%, 4.25% and 2.25% respectively.
16 March 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
to raise the interest rate on the mainrefinancing operations of the Eurosystem by0.25 percentage point to 3.5%, starting from

the operation to be settled on 22 March2000. In addition, it decides to increasethe interest rates on both the marginal
lending facility and the deposit facility by
0.25 percentage point, to 4.5% and 2.5%respectively, with effect from 17 March 2000.30 March, 13 April 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the interest rates on the main refinancing
operations, the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility will remain unchanged at3.5%, 4.5% and 2.5% respectively.20627 April 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
to raise the interest rate on the mainrefinancing operations of the Eurosystem by0.25 percentage point to 3.75%, starting from
the operation to be settled on 4 May 2000. Inaddition, it decides to increase the interestrates on both the marginal lending facility and
the deposit facility by 0.25 percentage point,to 4.75% and 2.75% respectively, both with
effect from 28 April 2000.
11 May, 25 May 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the interest rates on the main refinancing
operations, the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility will remain unchanged at3.75%, 4.75% and 2.75% respectively.
8 June 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
to raise the interest rate on the main
refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by0.50 percentage point to 4.25% and to applythis in the two operations (which will be

conducted as fixed rate tenders) to be settled
on 15 and 21 June 2000. In addition, it decidesto increase the interest rates on both the
marginal lending facility and the deposit facilityby 0.50 percentage point, to 5.25% and 3.25%respectively, both with effect from 9 June
2000.It also announces that, starting from theoperation to be settled on 28 June 2000,the main refinancing operations of theEurosystem will be conducted as variable rate
tenders, applying the multiple rate auctionprocedure. The Governing Council decides
to set a minimum bid rate for these
operations equal to 4.25%. The switch to
variable rate tenders in the main refinancingoperations is not intended as a further
change in the monetary policy stance of the
Eurosystem, but as a response to the severe
overbidding which has developed in thecontext of the current fixed rate tenderprocedure.19 June 2000In accordance with Article 122 (2) of theTreaty establishing the European Community,the ECOFIN Council decides that Greece
fulfils the necessary conditions for the
adoption of the single currency on the basisof the criteria set out in Article 121 (1) and
abrogates the derogation of Greece with
effect from 1  January 2001. The ECOFIN
Council took its decision, taking account of
the reports of the European Commissionand the ECB on the progress made in thefulfilment by Greece and Sweden of their
obligations regarding the achievement ofEconomic and Monetary Union, after consulting
the European Parliament, and after a discussion
in the EU Council meeting in the compositionof Heads of State or Government.
The ECOFIN Council, acting with theunanimity of the Member States of theEuropean Community without a derogation
and the Member State concerned, upon a
proposal from the European Commission andafter consultation of the ECB, also adopts
the irrevocable conversion rate between theGreek drachma and the euro, with effect from1  January 2001. Following the determination

of the euro conversion rate of the Greekdrachma (set equal to its then prevailingcentral rate against the euro in the exchange
rate mechanism, ERM II), the ECB and theBank of Greece announce that they willmonitor the convergence of the market
exchange rate of the Greek drachma againstthe euro towards its euro conversion rate,which should be completed at the latest by
29 December 2000.21 June 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the interest rates on the marginal lendingfacility and the deposit facility will remainunchanged at 5.25% and 3.25% respectively.
207The Governing Council announces that, for
the longer-term refinancing operations to beconducted in the second half of 2000, the
Eurosystem intends to allot an amount of15 billion per operation. This amount takesinto consideration the expected liquidity

needs of the banking system of the euro areain the second half of 2000 and the desire ofthe Eurosystem to continue to provide the
bulk of its refinancing of the financial sectorthrough its main refinancing operations.6 July, 20 July, 3 August 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the minimum bid rate on the mainrefinancing operations and the interest rates
on the marginal lending facility and thedeposit facility will remain unchanged at4.25%, 5.25% and 3.25% respectively.
31 August 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides toraise the minimum bid rate on the main
refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by
0.25 percentage point to 4.50%, with effect from
the operation to be settled on 6 September
2000. In addition, it decides to increase the
interest rates on both the marginal lendingfacility and the deposit facility by 0.25 percentage
point, to 5.50% and 3.50% respectively, bothwith effect from 1 September.14 September 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the minimum bid rate on the mainrefinancing operations and the interest rates
on the marginal lending facility and thedeposit facility will remain unchanged at4.50%, 5.50% and 3.50% respectively.
5 October 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
to raise the minimum bid rate on the mainrefinancing operations of the Eurosystem by0.25 percentage point to 4.75%, with effect
from the operation to be settled on

11 October 2000. In addition, it decides to
increase the interest rates on both themarginal lending facility and the deposit facility
by 0.25 percentage point, to 5.75% and 3.75%respectively, both with effect from 6 October.
19 October, 2 November,16 November, 30 November 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the minimum bid rate on the main
refinancing operations and the interest rateson the marginal lending facility and thedeposit facility will remain unchanged at
4.75%, 5.75% and 3.75% respectively.
14 December 2000The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the minimum bid rate on the mainrefinancing operations and the interest rateson the marginal lending facility and the
deposit facility will remain unchanged at4.75%, 5.75% and 3.75% respectively.
In addition, it decides to reconfirm theexisting reference value for monetary growth,namely an annual growth rate of 4½% for the
broad aggregate M3. The Governing Councilconfirms that it will undertake the nextreview of the reference value in December
2001.1 January 2001The euro is adopted by Greece. As a result,the Bank of Greece becomes a full memberof the Eurosystem, with the same rights and
obligations as the 11 national central banks

of the EU Member States which had adopted
the euro in 1999.2084 January 2001The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the minimum bid rate for the mainrefinancing operations and the interest rateson the marginal lending facility and the
deposit facility will remain unchanged at4.75%, 5.75% and 3.75% respectively.
In addition, it decides on an allotment amountof 20 billion per operation for the longer-
term refinancing operations to be conducted
in 2001. This amount takes into considerationthe expected liquidity needs of the euro areabanking system in 2001 and the desire of the

Eurosystem to continue to provide the bulkof refinancing of the financial sector throughits main refinancing operations. TheGoverning Council announces that it mayadjust the allotment amount in the course of
the year in the event of unexpecteddevelopments in liquidity needs.18 January, 1 February, 15 February,1 March, 15 March 2001The Governing Council of the ECB decides
that the minimum bid rate on the main
refinancing operations and the interest rateson the marginal lending facility and thedeposit facility will remain unchanged at
4.75%, 5.75% and 3.75% respectively.
209Documents published by theEuropean Central Bank (ECB)This list is designed to inform readers about selected documents published by the EuropeanCentral Bank. The publications are available to interested parties free of charge from the
Press Division. Please submit orders in writing to the postal address given on the back of the

title page.For a complete list of documents published by the European Monetary Institute, please visitthe ECB™s website (http://www.ecb.int).Annual ReportﬁAnnual Report 1998ﬂ, April 1999.
ﬁAnnual Report 1999ﬂ, April 2000.ﬁAnnual Report 2000ﬂ, May 2001.Convergence ReportﬁConvergence Report 2000ﬂ, May 2000.Monthly BulletinArticles published from January 1999 onwards:ﬁThe euro area at the start of Stage Threeﬂ, January 1999.
ﬁThe stability-oriented monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystemﬂ, January 1999.ﬁEuro area monetary aggregates and their role in the Eurosystem™s monetary policy strategyﬂ,
February 1999.ﬁThe role of short-term economic indicators in the analysis of price developments in theeuro areaﬂ, April 1999.ﬁBanking in the euro area: structural features and trendsﬂ, April 1999.ﬁThe operational framework of the Eurosystem: description and first assessmentﬂ, May 1999.ﬁThe implementation of the Stability and Growth Pactﬂ, May 1999.ﬁLonger-term developments and cyclical variations in key economic indicators acrosseuro area countriesﬂ, July 1999.ﬁThe institutional framework of the European System of Central Banksﬂ, July 1999.
ﬁThe international role of the euroﬂ, August 1999.ﬁThe balance sheets of the Monetary Financial Institutions of the euro area in early 1999ﬂ,August 1999.ﬁInflation differentials in a monetary unionﬂ, October 1999.
ﬁESCB preparations for the year 2000ﬂ, October 1999.210ﬁTARGET and payments in euroﬂ, November 1999.
ﬁLegal instruments of the European Central Bankﬂ, November 1999.
ﬁThe euro area one year after the introduction of the euro: key characteristics and changes in
the financial structureﬂ, January 2000.ﬁForeign exchange reserves and operations of the Eurosystemﬂ, January 2000.ﬁThe Eurosystem and the EU enlargement processﬂ, February 2000.ﬁConsolidation in the securities settlement industryﬂ, February 2000.ﬁThe nominal and real effective exchange rates of the euroﬂ, April 2000.ﬁEMU and banking supervisionﬂ, April 2000.ﬁThe information content of interest rates and their derivatives for monetary policyﬂ,May 2000.ﬁDevelopments in and structural features of the euro area labour marketsﬂ, May 2000.ﬁThe switch to variable rate tenders in the main refinancing operationsﬂ, July 2000.
ﬁMonetary policy transmission in the euro areaﬂ, July 2000.
ﬁPopulation ageing and fiscal policy in the euro areaﬂ, July 2000.ﬁPrice and cost indicators for the euro area: an overviewﬂ, August 2000.ﬁThe external trade of the euro area economy: stylised facts and recent trendsﬂ,
August 2000.ﬁPotential output growth and output gaps: concept, uses and estimatesﬂ, October 2000.
ﬁThe ECB™s relations with institutions and bodies of the European Communityﬂ,October 2000.ﬁThe two pillars of the ECB™s monetary policy strategyﬂ, November 2000.ﬁIssues arising from the emergence of electronic moneyﬂ, November 2000.ﬁThe euro area after the entry of Greeceﬂ, January 2001.
ﬁMonetary policy-making under uncertaintyﬂ, January 2001.ﬁThe ECB™s relations with international organisations and foraﬂ, January 2001.ﬁCharacteristics of corporate finance in the euro areaﬂ, February 2001.
ﬁTowards a uniform service level for retail payments in the euro areaﬂ, February 2001.
ﬁThe external communication of the European Central Bankﬂ, February 2001.
ﬁAssessment of general economic statistics for the euro areaﬂ, April 2001.ﬁThe collateral framework of the Eurosystemﬂ, April 2001.
ﬁThe introduction of euro banknotes and coinsﬂ, April 2001.ﬁStability-oriented policies and developments in long-term real interest rates in the 1990sﬂ,
November 1999.211Working Paper Series1ﬁA global hazard index for the world foreign exchange marketsﬂ by V. Brousseau and
F. Scacciavillani, May 1999.2ﬁWhat does the single monetary policy do? A SVAR benchmark for the European Central
Bankﬂ by C. Monticelli and O. Tristani, May 1999.3ﬁFiscal policy effectiveness and neutrality results in a non-Ricardian worldﬂ by C. Detken,
May 1999.4ﬁFrom the ERM to the euro: new evidence on economic and policy convergence among
EU countriesﬂ by I. Angeloni and L. Dedola, May 1999.
5ﬁCore inflation: a review of some conceptual issuesﬂ by M. Wynne, May 1999.
6ﬁThe demand for M3 in the euro areaﬂ by G. Coenen and J.-L. Vega, September 1999.
7ﬁA cross-country comparison of market structures in European bankingﬂ by O. De Bandt
and E. P. Davis, September 1999.
8ﬁInflation zone targetingﬂ by A. Orphanides and V. Wieland, October 1999.

9ﬁAsymptotic confidence bands for the estimated autocovariance and autocorrelation
functions of vector autoregressive modelsﬂ, by G. Coenen, January 2000.10ﬁOn the effectiveness of sterilized foreign exchange interventionﬂ, by R. Fatum,
February 2000.11ﬁIs the yield curve a useful information variable for the Eurosystem?ﬂ by J. M. Berk and
P. van Bergeijk, February 2000.12ﬁIndicator variables for optimal policyﬂ by L. E. O. Svensson and M. Woodford,
February 2000.13ﬁMonetary policy with uncertain parametersﬂ by U. Söderström, February 2000.
14ﬁAssessing nominal income rules for monetary policy with model and data uncertaintyﬂ
by G. D. Rudebusch, February 2000.15ﬁThe quest for prosperity without inflationﬂ by A. Orphanides, March 2000.
16ﬁEstimating the implied distribution of the future short-term interest rate using the
Longstaff-Schwartz modelﬂ by P. Hördahl, March 2000.
Occasional Paper Series1ﬁThe impact of the euro on money and bond marketsﬂ by Javier Santillán, Marc Bayle and
Christian Thygesen, July 2000.21220ﬁConvergence of fiscal policies in the euro areaﬂ by O. De Bandt and F. P. Mongelli,
May 2000.21ﬁFirm size and monetary policy transmission: evidence from German business survey dataﬂ
by M. Ehrmann, May 2000.
22ﬁRegulating access to international large-value payment systemsﬂ by C. Holthausen and
T. Rønde, June 2000.23ﬁEscaping Nash inflationﬂ by In-Koo Cho and T. J. Sargent, June 2000.

24ﬁWhat horizon for price stabilityﬂ by F. Smets, July 2000.
25ﬁCaution and conservatism in the making of monetary policyﬂ by P. Schellekens, July 2000.
26ﬁWhich kind of transparency? On the need for clarity in monetary policy-makingﬂ
by B. Winkler, August 2000.27ﬁThis is what the US leading indicators leadﬂ by M. Camacho and G. Perez-Quiros, August 2000.

28ﬁLearning, uncertainty and central bank activism in an economy with strategic interactionsﬂ
by M. Ellison and N. Valla, August 2000.29ﬁThe sources of unemployment fluctuations: an empirical application to the Italian caseﬂ
by S. Fabiani, A. Locarno, G. Oneto and P. Sestito, September 2000.30ﬁA small estimated euro area model with rational expectations and nominal rigiditiesﬂ
by G. Coenen and V. Wieland, September 2000.31ﬁThe disappearing tax base: Is foreign direct investment eroding corporate income taxes?ﬂ
by R. Gropp and K. Kostial, September 2000.
32ﬁCan indeterminacy explain the short-run non-neutrality of money?ﬂ by F. De Fiore,
September 2000.33ﬁThe information content of M3 for future inflation in the euro areaﬂ by C. Trecroci and
J. L. Vega, October 2000.34ﬁCapital market development, corporate governance and the credibility of exchange rate
pegsﬂ by O. Castrén and T. Takalo, October 2000.35ﬁSystemic Risk: A surveyﬂ by O. De Bandt and P. Hartmann, November 2000.
17ﬁAlternative measures of the NAIRU in the euro area: estimates and assessmentﬂ by
S. Fabiani and R. Mestre, March 2000.18ﬁHouse prices and the macroeconomy in Europe: results from a structural VAR analysisﬂ
by M. Iacoviello, April 2000.19ﬁThe euro and international capital marketsﬂ by C. Detken and P. Hartmann, April 2000.
21339ﬁA money demand system for euro area M3ﬂ by C. Brand and N. Cassola,
November 2000.40ﬁFinancial structure and the interest rate channel of ECB monetary policyﬂ by B. Mojon,
November 2000.41ﬁWhy adopt transparency? The publication of central bank forecastsﬂ by P.M. Geraats,
January 2001.42ﬁAn area-wide model (AWM) for the euro areaﬂ by G. Fagan, J. Henry and R. Mestre,
January 2001.43ﬁSources of economic renewal: from the traditional firm to the knowledge firmﬂ,
by D. Rodrigues Palenzuela, February 2001.44ﬁThe supply and demand for Eurosystem deposits Œ The first 18 monthsﬂ, by U. Bindseil
and F. Seitz, February 2001.45ﬁTesting the rank of the Hankel Matrix: A statistical approachﬂ, by G. Camba-Mendez and
G. Kapetanios, March 2001.
46ﬁA two-factor model of the German term structure of interest ratesﬂ by N. Cassola and
J. Barros Luis, March 2001.
47ﬁDeposit insurance and moral hazard: does the counterfactual matter?ﬂ by R. Gropp and
 J. Vesala, March 2001.
48ﬁFinancial market integration in Europe: on the effects of EMU on stock marketsﬂ by
M. Fratzscher, March 2001.Other publicationsﬁThe TARGET service levelﬂ, July 1998.
ﬁReport on electronic moneyﬂ, August 1998.
ﬁAssessment of EU securities settlement systems against the standards for their use in ESCBcredit operationsﬂ, September 1998.ﬁMoney and banking statistics compilation guideﬂ, September 1998.ﬁThe single monetary policy in Stage Three: General documentation on ESCB monetary
policy instruments and proceduresﬂ, September 1998.36ﬁMeasuring core inflation in the euro areaﬂ by C. Morana, November 2000.
37ﬁBusiness fixed investment: evidence of a financial accelerator in Europeﬂ by P. Vermeulen,
November 2000.38ﬁThe optimal inflation tax when taxes are costly to collectﬂ by F. De Fiore,
November 2000.214ﬁEuropean Union balance of payments/international investment position statistical methodsﬂ,November 1999.ﬁMoney and Banking Statistics Compilation Guide, Addendum I: Money market paperﬂ,November 1999.ﬁMoney and Banking Statistics Sector Manualﬂ, second edition, November 1999.ﬁReport on the legal protection of banknotes in the European Union Member Statesﬂ,November 1999.ﬁCorrespondent central banking model (CCBM)ﬂ, November 1999.ﬁCross-border payments in TARGET: A users™ surveyﬂ, November 1999.ﬁMoney and Banking Statistics: Series keys for the exchange of balance sheet items time
seriesﬂ, November 1999.ﬁMoney and Banking Statistics: Handbook for the compilation of flow statisticsﬂ,December 1999.ﬁPayment systems in the European Union: Addendum incorporating 1998 figuresﬂ,February 2000.ﬁInterlinking: Data dictionaryﬂ, Version 2.02, March 2000.ﬁAsset prices and banking stabilityﬂ, April 2000.ﬁEU banks™ income structureﬂ, April 2000.ﬁStatistical information collected and compiled by the ESCBﬂ, May 2000.ﬁCorrespondent central banking model (CCBM)ﬂ, July 2000.ﬁStatistical requirements of the European Central Bank in the field of general economicstatisticsﬂ, August 2000.ﬁSeasonal adjustment of monetary aggregates and HICP for the euro areaﬂ, August 2000.
ﬁImproving cross-border retail payment servicesﬂ, September 2000.ﬁStatistical treatment of the Eurosystem™s international reservesﬂ, October 2000.ﬁThird progress report on the TARGET projectﬂ, November 1998.
ﬁCorrespondent central banking model (CCBM)ﬂ, December 1998.
ﬁPayment systems in the European Union: Addendum incorporating 1997 figuresﬂ,January 1999.ﬁPossible effects of EMU on the EU banking systems in the medium to long termﬂ,
February 1999.ﬁEuro area monetary aggregates: conceptual reconciliation exerciseﬂ, July 1999.ﬁThe effects of technology on the EU banking systemsﬂ, July 1999.ﬁPayment systems in countries that have applied for membership of the European Unionﬂ,
August 1999.ﬁImproving cross-border retail payment services: the Eurosystem™s viewﬂ, September 1999.ﬁCompendium: collection of legal instruments, June 1998ŒMay 1999ﬂ, October 1999.
215Information brochuresﬁTARGET: facts, figures, futureﬂ, September 1999.
ﬁThe ECB payment mechanismﬂ, August 2000.ﬁThe euro: integrating financial servicesﬂ, August 2000.
ﬁTARGETﬂ, August 2000.ﬁThe European Central Bankﬂ, April 2001.ﬁThe euro banknotes and coinsﬂ, May 2001.
ﬁEuropean Union balance of payments/international investment position statistical methodsﬂ,November 2000.ﬁInformation guide for credit institutions using TARGETﬂ, November 2000.ﬁThe single monetary policy in Stage Three: General documentation on Eurosystem monetarypolicy instruments and proceduresﬂ, November 2000.ﬁEU banks™ margins and credit standardsﬂ, December 2000.ﬁMergers and acquisitions involving the EU banking industry: facts and implicationsﬂ,December 2000.ﬁCross-border use of collateral: A user™s surveyﬂ, February 2001.ﬁPrice effects of regulatory reform in selected network industriesﬂ, March 2001.ﬁThe role of central banks in prudential supervisionﬂ, March 2001.ﬁAnnual Accounts of the ECB 2000ﬂ, March 2001.
216ANNUAL REPORT 2000                                                            EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK
ENECB EZB EKT BCE EKPANNUAL
REPORT
2000